VLSI Implementation of Low Power High Throughput Low Density Parity Check Code
Decoder for Optical Communication
Kaushik Vaidyanathan, Student Member, IEEE, Anusha Radhakrishnan, Valli Sounthariya Kumar, and M.Kannan

Abstract--In this paper we propose a novel architecture with an adaptive approach to the existing partly parallel joint code and decoder design methodology for low density parity check (LDPC) codes. The low power and high throughput are achieved by an 'Adaptive Iteration Controller', regulating the number of iterations required for error correction. We propose an architecture for a 2304 bit, rate - l2, (3,6) regular LDPC code decoder which supports a symbol throughput of 216 Mbps and achieves a maximum BER of 10 -6 at 2dB over AWGN channel performing a maximum of 12 decoding iterations. We inspect the possibility of LDPC decoder serving as Channel decoders for Synchronous Optical Networks (SONET), 802.3an (1OG Ethernet), DVB-S2 (Digital Video Broadcast) and 802.16e (Broadband Wireless Access). Cadence RTL Compiler has been used for synthesis at 90nm and a special flow has been devised to predict and analyze performance in very deep sub-micrometer (vDSM).
Index Terms--Adaptive Iteration Controller, Adaptive Iterative Decoding, Check node Unit (CNU), Optical Communication (OC), Selective level shifter, Variable Node Unit (VNU), Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI).

demands be met, one possible solution could be a channel decoder which meets these requirements while handling efficiently the abundant resources like bandwidth, data rate and transmission power judiciously. Here amongst various decoders, the most suitable is LDPC Decoder which also offers a good error correcting performance.. The main issue in the design of an efficient LDPC decoder is to achieve simultaneously, high throughput, low power and simple implementation [6], [7]. Our architecture tries to obtain the best possible tradeoff amongst these. We have designed an adaptive iteration controller to control the soft decision decoder, thereby resulting in faster convergence to the correct code word, consuming lesser number of decoding iterations. We examine the real time application of this decoder in optical and wireless communication systems. We also analyze the issues hampering the effective implementation of our design below 90nm, to modify it for a feasible implementation in vDSM. The following section emphasizes on our innovative adaptive approach.
II. ADAPTIVE ITERATIVE DECODING APPROACH

I. INTRODUCTION
IN recent years, the rediscovery of LDPC codes [1],[2] has attracted the attention of many researchers and has been
considered the next generation decoders for wireless communication and magnetic storage systems. Over time, joint code and decoder design methodology is emerging as the most successful amongst other methodologies [4]. With noise being a major cause of concern in modem communication systems, efforts are being undertaken to minimize the same. But the modern system developers desire only a few well spaced repeaters for long haul systems, for low cost and easy installation. In order that these two contrasting but legitimate

We propose an adaptive approach to the existing partly parallel joint code decoder design [4] based on the decoding algorithm proposed in [3]. We exercise an adaptive control on the number of decoding iterations based on real-time inputs. Our postulates following up next form the basis of our approach.
A. Postulate 1
If 'i is the number of decoding iterations, then there exists an 'ioptimal ' if and only if dham < dmin and dmin > 2t+1 such that:
ioptimal < iterminate < Lax where

Kaushik Vaidyanathan is a student of the Department of Electronics

Engineering, Madras Institute of Technology, Anna University, Chennai

600044 INDIA. ( e-mail:

)

Anusha Radhakrishnan is a student of the Department of Electronics

Engineering, Madras Institute of Technology, Anna University, Chennai

600044 INDIA. (e-mail: as

)

Valli Sounthariya Kumar is a student of the Department of Electronics

Engineering, Madras Institute of Technology, Anna University, Chennai

600044 INDIA. (e-mail: s h sz,m c

Kannan.M is with the Department of Electronics Engineering, Madras

Institute of Technology, Anna University, Chennai 600044 INDIA. ( e-mail:

1-4244-370-7/06/$20.00 ow006IEEE.

'iterminate' is the number of iterations for which the soft decoder proposed by [4] operates until the parity check is satisfied.
'imax' is the limit on the maximum number of iterations which the decoder can perform to correct the incoming bits in error. This value is usually set by the constraints posed by the hardware to meet low power and high throughput requirements of the decoder.
'dham' is the distance of any correct code word from the hard decision bits of the soft decision decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

'dmin' is the minimum hamming distance between any two correct code words of the H matrix.
't' is the maximum number of bits which the decoder can correct when received in error.
The value of 'ioptimal' is computed statistically by passing random inputs following Gaussian distribution, with a fixed 'dham' from any correct code word and the number of iterations required for iterative decoding is stored in a finite set 'I'. The mean of this set I is 'ioptimal'.

iv) If i='ioptim.l±+' and the parity check is not satisfied, then
perform probability level shifting as instructed by Postulate 2. Continue performing the iterative decoding
algorithm till either ima, iterations are over or the parity
check is satisfied v) The decoder gives the current hard decision bits as the output and terminates the decoding process.
III. ARCHITECTURE

B. Postulate 2

If the prior probabilities pn0 = P(x. 0) and p,2 = P(x.=1) lIpn0, n = 1, ... , N and assuming that the positions of bits in
error after 'ioptimal ' iterations are stored in 'E', then, to speed up the convergence to the correct code word,
1) The probability at the position of bits in error
indicated by 'E' should be level shifted as pn00.6 or
0.4, if the value at position 'n' is a 0 or 1
respectively. 2) The probability at the position of correct bits
indicated by 'B' should be level shifted as p,0=0.9 or
0.1, if the value at position 'n' is a 0 or 1 respectively.
The algorithm gives out a faithful result in the least number
of iterations only when the probability level shifting is done after 'ioptimal' iterations.

C. Adaptive Iterative Decoding Algorithm

The proper application of the above two postulates in the adaptive iterative algorithm has resulted in an enormous reduction in the number of decoding iterations as shown Fig. 1, thus enhancing throughput and decreasing power consumption. The algorithm follows up next.

20
1816 14 12
Cn/,
0 10 a) 8 06 64
z
2

t.
I ,I

I
I
I I I I I

[4] As ........ per
-Adaptive Iterative Decoding

0

10

20

30

No. of bits corrected

Fig. 1. Comparison of Decoding Iterations.

i) Perform iterative decoding [3] for 'i'=1 and collect the
hard decision bits 'hdl'.
ii) Proceed with the decoding procedure in parallel and
also instruct the decoder with a value of 'ioptimal' computed as stated in Postulate 1.
iii) At the instant when the parity check is satisfied, go to step (v).

The code construction issues follow the discussions in [4].
The overall architecture consists of three major blocks,
namely, Soft decision LDPC decoder, Iteration controller and Selective level shifter, as shown in Fig.2. The innovativeness of our idea lies in the efficient control logic design which regulates the soft decision decoder and also makes the decoder converge faster, requiring lesser iterations for decoding.

Selective Level Shifter

Error Position Detector

Probability Level Shifter

Soft
Decision
> Decoder

Iteration Controller

Correct

Hamming

LUT

code

Vector

For

word ROM

computation

'optimal

&Controller

Unit

Fig. 2. Overall Architecture.

A. Soft decision Decoder

This in an iterative decoder constituting the following building blocks as in [4]: Check Node Processing Unit (CNU), Variable Node Processing Unit (VNU) and Interleaver.

B. Iteration Controller

This block operates on the basis of Postulate 1. Its functionality is to find 'ioptimal' and 'Hamming vector', given the current hard decision bits and the available correct code words
set. Correct code word ROM stores all the possible correct code words corresponding to the parity check matrix (H). The ROM read and write access is controlled using scheduling algorithms specified in [7]. The Hamming vector computation unit computes the Hamming vector and the Hamming distance from each correct codeword and determines the minimum
Hamming distance. A Look Up Table (LUT) is used to store the ioptimal value, corresponding to each minimum Hamming distance, computed based on MATLAB simulation analysis as stated in Postulate 1.

C. Selective Level Shifter

This block operates on the basis of Postulate 2. Its basic functionality is to perform a probability level shifting after 'ioptimal' iterations so that the decoder converges to the correct

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

code, undergoing minimum number of iterations, correcting the bits in error. The Error Position Detector Unit determines the position of the bits in error. It is computationally intensive. We split the huge vector into manageable smaller blocks. The Probability Level Shifter takes in, the positions of bits in error from the Error Position detector unit and selectively shifts the probability level of the bits, as stated in Postulate 2, thus aiding faster convergence.
IV. MULTI STAGE ANALYSIS
We now perform a stage-wise analysis and indicate how these three basic constituent modules interact among themselves so as to realize the basic functionality of the decoder, which now consumes lower power and has lower latency, offering the same error correcting performance as the earlier proposed architectures [6], [4].

Vector' corresponding to the minimum distant codeword from
'hdopt',as shown in Fig.4.
D. Probability Level Shifting Stage
Now the Selective level shifter block is triggered which
takes in the 'Hamming vector' and 'hdopt' and computes the level shifted inputs, 'inp,, ', to be fed to the soft decision
decoder, as shown in Fig.5, at 'ioptima±+2'. Thus the intrinsic message alone is level shifted retaining the CNU to VNU
messages of 'ioptjml±+1'. Thus the probability level shifting
results in faster convergence without manipulating the interaction parameters between CNU and the VNU.

A. Initialization Stage

In this stage the decoder is initialized with the inputs and
imax. Consequently, it performs a soft iteration. The hard decision bits at the end of this soft iteration, 'hdl',are passed to the iteration controller. The decoder starts its second iteration, while the 'ioptimal' is computed in parallel as elaborated in the
consequent stage.

B. 'optimal' Estimation Stage
Once 'hdl' is received by the iteration controller it compares it with all possible correct code words and arrives at a 'd&i,' and maps that 'dmin' to an appropriate 'ioptimal' using the LUT and passes the 'ioptimal' back to the iterative decoder as shown in
Fig.3. This 'ioptimal' is the upper bound on the number of iterations the decoder operates before applying Postulate 2.

Fig. 4. Hamming Vector Generation Stage.

u U
.;
__ _ ____

Soft Decisio
LDPC Decoder
optimal

Selective Level Shifter

--

> ----------- =>
=>

Idle
Idle Active

Fig. 3. 'ioptimal Estimation Stage operation.

C. Hamming Vector Generation Stage

Once 'ioptimal' iterations are performed by the decoder and the parity check still remains unsatisfied, the decoder passes the
hard decision bits at the end of 'ioptimal +1' iterations, 'hdopt', to
the Iteration Controller, triggering it to generate a 'Hamming

Fig. 5. Probability Level Shifting Stage.
E. Fast Convergence Stage
This is the final stage when the decoder either converges to a correct codeword correcting the bits in error, or 'i' reaches
'imax', and the decoder terminates.
Earlier in any step, had the parity check equation been satisfied, the decoding terminates, giving the correct code word as the output. Thus we observe that most of the time, the control logic is dormant, thereby causing no overheads in power. Further the adaptive approach in itself has reduced the number of iterations, leading to a tremendous reduction in power and enhancement in speed, further substantiating our postulates.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES AND SOLUTIONS
The Adaptive approach enables the decoder to adapt to varying inputs, thereby improving its efficiency. We faced the following issues in the design of LDPC decoder based on our adaptive iterative decoding approach.
A. Large Code Size
The computation of dham and the estimation of the position of bits in error are computationally intensive since the size of the code word is huge. This Hamming vector computation unit is fully parallel, thus having low latency, but consuming sizable hardware. The Error position detection unit uses the same hardware in a time multiplexed fashion, thereby conserving hardware. Thus here we have a tradeoff between speed and hardware.
B. Iteration Controller Design
In order that it does not consume too much power, the 'Iteration Controller' is invoked only when required and by
making 'ioptimal' very low compared to 'iten,inate', it is ensured that
the entire decoding process consumes only less power.

which is costly in terms of resources. Further our simulation results indicate that our postulates 1 & 2 lead to a notable reduction in the number of decoding iterations for Optical Networks due to their inherent low loss nature. SONET/SDH has mainly risen to prominence because of its capacity to support data, voice and multimedia together. The requirements on BER for any Data Communication system are always higher compared to Voice. LDPC decoders, chiefly due to their impeccable error correcting capacity, and high throughput which our design provides, can be more suitable for high data rate data communication systems like SONET/SDH or DVB-S2 (Digital Video Broadcasting). Next we go one step further and inspect the application of these decoders for wireless communication systems. All communication systems, starting from the conventional digital communication systems to the high end systems like Free space and Deep Space Optics, can reap great benefits from the high throughput and low power resulting from our adaptive approach. Now standards like 802.16e for Broadband Wireless Access and 802.3an for lOG Ethernet are also moving towards using LDPC decoders where our approach can give the user an edge over the previous designs of LDPC.
VII. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

C. Functional Verification

A. Throughput Analysis

The verification of the design thoroughly is more or less impossible, so we introduce here, an approach which verifies the decoder only for inputs which are more likely to occur. These inputs can be obtained by knowing the error correcting capability 't' of the parity check matrix (H). Thus, this greatly minimizes the huge combination of inputs for which we have to verify the design. The probable cases have been tested using MATLAB. Specman Elite was used for functional verification.

The throughput is computed as follow
Throughput Block length x code rate x frequency Latency
The throughput of the adaptive iterative decoder we have designed is 216 Mbps which is four times more than that in
the earlier proposed design [4].
B. Synthesis Results

D. Memory Handling
Memory has become a major bottleneck which has to be tackled by proper scheduling schemes as mentioned in [7]. We are using a dual port RAM, since writing to and reading from different locations of the RAM in parallel is a basic requirement due to the pipelining of the design. The architecture demands 144 instances of 64*8 Dual Port RAM. This humungous requirement makes efficient memory access critical.
VI. ADAPTIVE ITERATIVE DECODING APPROACH BASED LDPC DECODERS FOR
TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
Earlier for OC-1 (Optical Communication Standard), Turbo Decoders were used [5], but now with the architecture we have proposed which ensures low power and high throughput, LDPC Decoders can chip in as a judicious choice for optical and wireless communication systems. SONET/SDH standards especially based on OC-3 and OC-12 used for long haul communication systems invariably use large number of repeaters necessitating an opto-electronic-opto conversion

We have used Cadence RTL Compiler synthesis engine and have obtained the following results.
1) Power Analysis: We have used Toggle Count Format (TCF) for accurate power analysis using RTL Compiler and have observed a maximum power reduction of 20%.
2) Instance Count: 93,657 which is an increase of 500 over the earlier design.
3) Area: 16.67 mm2 of which the macros (RAM) occupies up to 75 % and logic occupies 25% of the total area.
4) Logic Equivalence Check: Logic Equivalence Checker (LEC) has been used to verify functional compatibility between RTL and synthesized netlist.
5) Clock Gating Flow: Up to 50% of the cells were clock gated resulting in enormous power savings.
6) MultiV, Flow: It resulted in an enhancement of speed by
100.
VIII. VERY DEEP SUB-MICROMETER ANALYSIS
We have come up with a predictive flow which includes analysis at all levels of abstraction from Hardware Description level to Device Level, considering various issues that may

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

possibly be encountered below 90nm [8]. The flow depicted in Fig.6 shows an integration of Synthesis, Trial Floorplan and Trial Place and Route, since information regarding interconnect length is necessary to make predictions close to the actual delays and power, below 90 nm. Basically we have designed a tool using PERL to translate a Verilog netlist to a Spice Netlist with suitable interconnect modeling based on Berkeley Predictive Technology Modeling (BPTM). Finally we use Cadence Virtuoso for simulating the design using MOS models for 45 nm to obtain power and delay projections and also a set of guidelines to fix the violations, if they arise. Thus using this flow which we have developed, the designer gets a prior idea of how his design behaves in vDSM.
Functionally verified and Simulated HDL

[3] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, Low-density parity check codes over
GF(q), IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 2, pp. 165-167, June 1998.
[4] H.Zhong and T.Zhang Block-LDPC: A Practical LDPC coding system design approach, IEEE transactions on circuits and systems i: regular papers, vol. 52, no. 4, April 2005.
[5] B.Vasic, I.B.Djordjevic - Low-density parity check codes for long-haul optical communication systems, IEEE photonics technology letters, vol. 14, no. 8, august 2002
[6] E.Bouttillon, J.Castura and F.R.Kschischang -Decoder-first code design, in Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Sept.2000.
[7] F.Guilloud, ENST Bretagne and E.Boutillon, University of South BritanyArchitectures for LDPC decoders, 2005 IEEE Commuxnication Workshop.

Synthesis + Place and Route

[8] ITRS journals and reports, ivivijw. it-s.net.
XII. BIOGRAPHIES

Kaushik Vaidyanthan is a final year student specializing in
Electronics and Communication
Engineering at Madras Institute of Technology, Anna University. He prefixes his department within college and works in the area of communication and VLSI. His major projects are LDPC Decoder Design and research works in Very Deep
Sub-Micrometer.

(Power & Delay)
Fig. 6. vDSM Flow.
IX. CONCLUSION

Anusha Radhakrishnan is a final year student specializing in
Electronics and Communication
Engineering at Madras Institute of Technology, Anna University. She is presently working on LDPC and Very Deep Sub-Micrometer issues.

Thus this paper presents an Adaptive Iterative Decoding approach based LDPC decoder. The simulation and synthesis results clearly indicate the performance enhancements which the Adaptive Iteration Controller provides over the conventional design methodology [4]. The enhancements in throughput and reduction in power that our design provides, makes LDPC decoders more suitable for optical and wireless communication systems. Thus we have achieved the best possible tradeoff amongst the various idealistic design goals.

Valli Sounthariya Kumar is a final year student specializing
in Electronics and Communication
Engineering at Madras Institute of Technology, Anna University. She is presently working on LDPC and low pow~er FFT.

X. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors sincerely acknowledge the VLSI lab members, alumni and the Department of Electronics Engineering, Madras Institute of Technology, Anna University for the
tremendous support rendered.
XI. REFERENCES

M.Kannan is a senior lecturer in Madras Institute of Technology,
Anna University. He has been working on Reconfigurable Systems, Computer Architecture, Image Processing and
LDPC.

[1] R. G. Gallager - Low-density parity-check codes, IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes, M.I.T Press, 1963.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:45:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

