M4B-2
Modified Min-Sum Algorithm for LDPC Decoders
in UWB Communications
Jun Tang , Tejas Bhattt, Victor Stolpmant
tDept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering UIniveersity of Minnesota tangjun ece. umn.edu tNokia Research Center Irving, TX
{Tejas.Bhatt, Victor.Stolpman}j@nokia.com

Abstract= Several variations of the sum-product algorithm (SPA) have been proposed for the decoding of the low density parity check (LDPC) codes. Among these, the log domain belief propagation algorithm (log-BPA or simply BPA) is widely adopted in most of the proposed LDPC decoder architectures. The check node unit (CNU), which computes the check-tovariable (C2V) messages, is computationally the most complex part of the decoder employing the belief propagation algorithm. The BPA can be approximated using a sub-optimal min-sum algorithm; however, it suffers from the performance loss. The
min-sum algorithm can be easily implemented with comparators
and multiplexers, thereby reducing the area and the power consumption of the decoder, critical for the high data-rate applications such as Ultra Wide-Band (UWB) communications system. Due to the performance degradation, the decoder needs to perform more decoding iterations to reach the desired performance. This, in turn, increases the decoder latency and reduces the decoder throughput. One approach to improve the decoder throughput is to layout more parallel CNUs inside a decoder, but this offsets the advantage of the min-sum implementation. On the other hand, the performance of the mim-sum algorithm can be improved by scaling the node-to-check messages and it is possible to find optimal scaling factor for a given channel. In this paper, we propose an improvement to the min-sum algorithm based on the analysis of the error term in the mim-sum algorithm. The proposed algorithm achieves the performance similar to the scaled min-sum (SMS) approach with optimal scaling, in the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. We also show that the proposed modified min-sum (MMS) algorithm can be utilized with different fading channels and LDPC codes without any further adjustments. Thus, the proposed MMS algorithm provides flexibility in real applications, which need to support multiple code rates, block sizes and have to operate in unknown fading channels. The performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated for the MB-OFDM UWB systems with short distance indoor channel models. To meet the speed requirement of the of the UWB systems, a bit-level pipelined comparator is developed, which significantly reduces the latency of the critical path in the comparison circuit.
Index Terms-ultra wideband, multi-band OFDM, low density parity check codes, min-sum, modified min-sum, bit-level pipelined
'The author was with Nokia research center at Irving, TX when coimnpleting
this work

I. INTRODUCTION
In the current MB-OFDM ultra wideband (UWB) communication standards, the convolutional code is specified as the forward error colrrection (FEC) scheme, which provides reasonable error correction performance [1]. Recently, advanced coding schemes such as LDPC have been proposed by several researchers to improve the link performance and the range of the UWB communications systems [2]-[4]. Moreover,
with the recent advancements in the hardware technologies,
it is possible to implement the high throughput advanced FEC decoder with reasonable area and power consumption. The LDPC decoder typically implements two-phase messagepassing algorithm commonly referred to as the sum product algorithm (SPA). The SPA can be efficiently implemented using the log-domain belief propagation algorithm (BPA). In the BPA, the check-to-variable (C2V) messages are computed
using, the 0( ) function, defined as
OW = 0-'(x) -ln ftanh ( ] x>0 (1)
Since 3(-) the direct hardware implementation circuit is com-
plex. It can be implemented using the lookup tables (LUTs) stored in the read only memory (ROM) [5], [6]. In [7], Zhang and Parhi have proposed some nonlinear LUT structure in C2V unit so that the ROM size is reduced. In [8], Fossorier has proposed the min-sum algorithm, which expoits the mono-
tonic property of the function 0( ) and significantly reduce
the computational complexity at the expense of the decoder performance. The performance loss in the min-sum algorithm generally leads to higher number of required iterations to reach the given bit-error-rate (BER) or packet-error-rate (PER) performance. The increased number of iterations may lead to increased decoding latency thereby limiting the achievable throughput, which is undesired in high throughput applications such as UWB. We can improve the decoder latency by increasing the parallelism in the decoder architecture, so that the processing speed of each iteration is increased
However, the parallelism in hardware usually leads to higher
hardware complexity (cost) and power consumption. Several

1-4244-0102-X/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE 125 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:47:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

modifications have been proposed to improve the performance of the min-sum algorithm, which moderately increases the implementation complexity of the min-sum algorithm. Eleftheriou et. al. have proposed a scaled min-sum (SMS) algorithm, which scales down the soft information in the decoder by a constant scaling factor, achieving the performance close to the original BPA [9]. However, in the SMS, the optimal scaling factor varies according to the code rate and channel fading (especially for the orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems with a frequency selective fading channel). Thus, to support different code rates and fading channels, multiple scaling factors must be employed in the hardware implementation of the decoder. In this paper, we propose an improvement in the mim-sum algorithm that compensates the
error term in the conventional min-sum (CMS) algorithm, which can be implemented with simple circuits. Unlike the SMS, the proposed modified min-sum (MMS) algorithm is
robust to all code rates and fading channels. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, the proposed MMS algorithm is introduced. In Section III, we provide the simulation results of the MMS algorithm for multiband-OFDM (MB-OFDM) based UWB system, with different channel models specified in IEEE 802.15.3a standard. The results are compared with the BPA, conventional min-sum and scaled min-sum algorithms. The hardware implementation issues are discussed in Section IV. Specifically, the bit-level pipelined comparators are introduced that allows the implementation of MMS algorithm at very high clock rate, making it a good candidate for UWB communications. Finally, the conclusions are summarized in Section V.
II. MODIFIED MIN-SuM ALGORITHM
In the belief propagation with sum-product algorithm, the C2V messages in the q-th iteration are obtained through magnitude and sign of the variable-to-check (V2C) messages in the (q -)-th iteration as:

VI(cv<(q) ) - i E(q-v1))1

(2)

'lC Ri \ {i}

S(Cv(=) j (_)P

sign vcj l

(3)

jf ERi\fjl

(qt) _-5(CVi(q2) )M(CV(q) )

4

where cv<q) is the C2V message along edge (i? j) in the q-
th iteration I V(civn(jq)J and S ciqj),aaree the maagnitude and
sign of the C2V message vc(q 1L) is the V2C message along
edge (i, j) in the (q -)-th iteration, Ri represents the set of column indices of non zero elements in the parity check
matrix H of the LDPC codes on row i. To compute the
magnitudes of all C2V messages on the same row we need
to compute 2ki 0zQ) functions, where ki Rj is the size of
the set, i e, the number of elements in the set Ri In some
high-speed applications, the computation is achieved through 2 look-up tables (LUT) stored in ROM [6]. As proposed in

[8], the magnitude of cv' ,' can be approximated with a simple minimum operation as,

M(cv<(q))R mi{n i( }vc) )

(5)

The magnitude of all the C2V messages on the same row of H can be computed by computing minimum and second minimum of the magnitude of the V2C messages for the row
and corresponding sign bit, explained by (3). If we denote,

VCminL,z- JCRi (|vCj,i)

(6)

3msin arg min*jvc,d

(7)

jERi

vcmij

min( ( )

(8)

Jnmn 2- arg min vc,i

(9)

j Ri \iiri

the CMS algorithm can be implemented as

i(qi) {r (q-1) if\j{ jminf

(10)

mVini ifj R Jrn

The error in approximation of the magnitude computation leads to performance loss. The effect of errors in the CMS algorithm has been evaluated using density evolution [10], and it was shown that the soft information in the CMS decoder is overestimated due to the errors. In [9], a scaled min-sum approach was presented and it was shown that the performance of the min-sum algorithm can be improved by scaling down the soft-information with a scaling factor smaller than 1. However, the SMS algorithm has some constraints:

(a) In [9], the optimal scaling factor was obtained based on the density evolution, while the density evolution was only derived for regular LDPC codes and it requires the interconnection between the check nodes and variable nodes to be local tree-type structure. It should be noted that the scaling factor can also be determined heuristically.
(b) As demonstrated in [9], the choice of the scaling factor affects the decoding performance. Moreover, the optimal scaling factors may vary for different codes. In most of the
practical communications systems, the channel decoder needs to support multiple code rates and/or different code structures. Further, the SMS method is not yet verified for frequency selective fading channel.

In this paper, we propose a simple error compensation algorithm for the CMS based on the analysis of the error in mmn approximation. We show that the proposed modified min-sum approach can be implemented with small increase in hardware overhead. The min-sum algorithm is derived based
on the following approximation.

0(o(x) + 0(y)) -- min(x, y)

(1 1)

given that x and y are non-negative The approximation is less accurate when the values of x and y are close to each other.
When ki increases in (5), the probability of vcj,i having
closer values increases and the error in the approximation

126 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:47:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

becomes non-negligible. Thus, we have to find the dominant term in the approximation error and compensate for it. For
illustration purpose, we will first look at the case when ki = 2:

0(0(x) + j(y)) = min(x, y) + In [I + £-xyl

-In1 + e- -Jj]

(12)

= min(w, y) + f(X,w-y)-f (;, y)

min(x, y)-J (x Y)

where f (x, y) is defined as

f ( y) = ln(1 + e-I Yl)

(13)

which is the dominant error term in the CMS algorithm. The
approximation at the last step of (12) is from the fact that the
chance of both x and y being very small is rare. For ki > 2, among all of the V2C messages, the error term is dominated
by the third minimum value. Denote

ujc,d) min
jGR \fjm1j,jn iin

(14)

Jrmin

arg min lvc1

(15)

jG R\ {jri r2 inJ }

Then in q-th iteration, the C2V messages on the same row can be computed using the equation in (16).
The f(x,y) function in (16) can be further approximated by a simple circuit (which is even simpler than an adder)
according to [11]:

N1536 R1/2 Ns 24, 10 Iterations Floating Point AWGN 10

10

10-'

LmU 10

10........................

10 -6-

Min-Sum min-sum s0.8 modified Min-Sum modified Min-Sum 8iter
log-MAP

SNR (dB)

(a) BER
N1536 R1/2 Ns 24, 10 Iterations Floating Point AWGN
100

10

LU 10'

( y) F(, y) = max

x 4y o)

(17)

For a reasonable range of x - y l, F(x, y) provides a good
approximation for f (x, y) [11]. At the same time, when we use
F(x, y) to approximate the f (x, y) function in (16), since we already know which variable is bigger (VCin 3,i > VCiyi2,i >
vcrninli), the operation can be removed from F(, y) function, i.e., F(x, y) = max (, £4-- 0), by knowing that
x > y. With this approximation, (16) turns into (18).

10-'

Min-Sum min-sum s0.8 V modified Min-Sum A modified Min-Sum 8iter -e- log-MAP

0.6 0.8

1

1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

2

2.2 2.4 2.6

SNR (dB)

(b) PER

Fig. 1. Perforimance of the proposed MMS algorithm in AWGN channel.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS
We now evaluate the performance of the proposed decoding algorithm and compare it with the scaled min-sum and logMAP algorithms. We adopt the so-called layered mode belief propagation (L-BP), proposed in [11], which improves the convergence of the conventional belief propagation algorithm and cuts the required iteration by more than half. The layered
approach is implemented for all the flavors of LDPC decoding algorithm, log-MAP (i.e. tan-h), convenitional min-sum, scaled min-sum and the modified min-sum.
A. Simulation in AWGN Channel
We consider an irregular quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code similar to one described in [12]. The parity-check matrix is specified with a small exponent matrix and all non negative element within the exponent matrix are replaced with permuted
identity matrix. The size of permutation matrix and exponent
matrix determines the code block size and code rate. For

our simulation, we consider a rate 1/2 LDPC code of blocksize 1536 constructed from exponent matrix of size 24 x 48 and permutation matrix of size 32 x 32. The BER and PER
performance comparison are shown in Fig. l(a) and Fig. 1(b)
respectively. For AWGN case, we assume I code-block per transmitted packet and hence PER is same as code-word
error rate (C-WER or WER). From Fig. l(a) and Fig. l(b),
it can be observed that MMS algorithm provides significant performance gain compared to CMS algorithm and performs close to the log-MAP. The MMS outperforms CMS even with fewer number of iterations (the curve marked with "modified min-sum 8iter") Moreover the MMS algorithm performs as good as or better than the SMS algorithm with the optimal scaling factor 0.8 (for rate 1/2 codes).
B Simulation with MB-OFDM Systems
In this sub-section we present the simulation results for the MB-OFDM UWB system with the channel models provided

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u2n7e 23,2026 at 18:47:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

in the 802.15.3a standard committee [13]. In this simulation, we chose an irregular QC-LDPC code with code rate 1/2 and codeword length 1200, with the permutation matrix of size 25 x 25. Fig. 2(a) shows the performance comparison
between log-MAP, CMS and the proposed MMS algorithm in channel CMI [13], with ideal channel state information.
The decoder implements layered-mode belief-propagation with a maximum of 10 decoding iterations. It can be observed that the performance of the CMS algorithm is about 0.75 dB worse than the log-MAP approach. It can also be seen that the MMS approach significantly improves the performance of the decoder and has performance within 0.2dB of the logMAP approach. Fig. compares the performance of various decoding algorithms in CMI and CM3 with the least-square channel estimator. It can be observed that the performance
loss of the CMS algorithm, compared to log-MAP, is smaller
than the performance loss observed with perfect channel state information. This can be explained by the higher sensitivity of log-MAP computations to the potential channel estimation error. This is effect is more evident in CM3 channel model, because it is longer than the zero-prefix (guard period) of the OFDM system, leading to sub-optimal performance of the channel estimator. Moreover, the performance of the modified min-sum algorithm is as good as or even slightly better than the log-MAP decoder. This demonstrates the robustness of the proposed MMS algorithm against the channel estimation errors.

(a) CM1 with ideal channel inforimation

IV. HIGH SPEED CIRCUIT DESIGN
In order to realize high throughput to support high datarates for UWB system, the decoder must have lower latency. Moreover, decoder needs to operate at high clock frequency to achieve data-rates up to few hundreds of millions of bit per second (Mbps). We now consider the high speed implementation issues for the modified min-sum algorithm. In particular, we take a closer look at the compare-select operation, which is the critical operation in the modified min-sum decoder.
As explained in Section II, the V2C messages for each row of parity-check matrix H are computed in 2 steps. First, we obtain three minimum values of the V2C messages by comparing the magnitude of all the V2C messages in the row. The column indices of the three minimum V2C messages are recorded. Next, the C2V messages are updated based on (18) for all the bit-nodes that participate in the check node, i.e. the row of a parity-check matrix. One approach to compute three minimum values is to lay out bank of comparators

(b) CMI and CM3 with least square channel estimator
Fig. 2. Performance of the proposed MMS algorithm in MB-OFDM Systerms channel.
that allows parallel compare-select operations and lead to fast implementation at the expense of more hardware resources. Such a parallel implementation not only increases hardware complexity but also the data bus width of the V2C message memory.
To reduce the hardware complexity of the comparator in Step I and the data bus width of the V2C message memory, we consider a serial mmn-sum approach, wherein during each clock cycle the check node processor compares one V2C

IVCmin 2,i (VCmin 3,i VCminn2,i)}
Nlt(c i(,q))) vc-v{VcC)m}ini -f(VCmin 3,i, VCminn,

J -Jmin2

i R{.vii2in

(16)

{ VCin,i - f(VCmn,i vcn )- f(vcm 3i, VCmi A+ j -ERi \ 1 .J ZIitii ~.Jmill 2

M(cv(<) (qf?V)~Ciiiiii2,i- F (VVmCmiiinnn33,3i,,i:VVCmCi1ini,ii)22,i I+

J J

t=-VCSJJmmmiiin2

(18)

{{VCmin,i F(VCmin V,C)mF(rnn,VCm,i3 VCmin ,i)}±+ R 2{

128 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:47:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I Hi(GHEST ACHIEVABLE CLOCK RATES IN THE COMPARE-SELECT CIRCUIT
IN THE MMS ALGOlRITHM

Pipeline Area Highest Freq

N Factor (# of Gates) (MHz)

7

403

3192

6

445

345.6

5

454

380.9

4

476

445.6

8

3

541

498.7

2

633

597.7

1

913

722.8

Fig. 3

374

3303

Fig. 3. Comparator in the min-sum algorithm.

algorithm is thus well suited for high throughput applications such as UWB.

message with the previously stored minimum value. The serial implementation requires three comparators to obtain three minimum values and all the three minimum values are
obtained after ki clock cycles. Fig. 3 illustrates the diagram
of the serial comparator. The critical path is also marked in the figure with a blue dotted line, which passes through an N --bit comparator and a 3-to-I selector (multiplexer). As the word-length, N, of the V2C message increases, the propagation delay on the critical path also increases, which will limit the highest operating clock rate.
To break the limit on the critical path, the bit-level pipelined comparator was proposed as shown in Fig. 4. In the bitlevel-pipelined comparator, the critical path is broken down to a single bit and the comparison can be performed without knowing all resulting bits of the compare-select in the last iteration. The similar technology has been explored in the addcompare-select (ACS) unit in the high-speed Viterbi decoder design [14], [15], to compute the minimal metrics.
In Table I, we summarized the synthesis results of bit-level pipelined implementation of the compare-select circuit in the MMS algorithm with word-length N = 8. The results was obtained with TSMC 0.25jim technology library provided in Mentor Graphics ASIC Design Kit (ADK) 3.0. In the table, the pipeline factor refers to the number of bit-level comparison unit (Fig. 4(b)) between two adjacent pipeline cutsets. From the table, we can observe that the proposed bit-level pipelined design can achieve more than twice faster clock rate than the nonpipelined design.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a novel modified minsum algorithm that compensates for the dominant error term of the conventional min approximation The proposed MMS algorithm performs close to optimal log-MAP approach and is robust to the channel estimation error and fading channels. We have also presented a pipelined comparator circuit that shortens the critical path of the compare select operation in the the mm approximation and doubles the operating clock frequency of the hardware implementation. The proposed

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Heikki Berg and Timo
Lunttila for providing simulation platform for this work.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Batra, J. Balakrishnan, and A. Dabak, "Multi-band OFDM: A new approach for UWB," in Piroceedings of the 2004 Intemational Symposium on Circruits and Systems, vol. 5, May 2004, pp. V-365 -
V-368. [2] H.-Y Liu, C.-C. Lin, Y-W. Lin, C.-C. Chung, K.-L. Lin, W.-C. Chang,
L. -H. Chen, H.-C. Chang, and C. -Y Lee, "A 480Mb/s LDPC-COFDMbased UWB baseband transceiver," in 2005 IEEE International SolidStrte Circuits Conference, vol. 1, 2005, pp. 444-609. [3] K.-B. Png, X. Peng, and F. Chin, "Performance studies of a multiband OFDM system using a simplified LDPC code," in Joint UWBST & IWUWBS. 2004, 2004, pp. 376-380. [4] S. min Kim1, J. Tang, and K. K. Parhi, "Quasi-cyclic low-deansity paritycheck coded multiband-OFDM UWB systems," in IEEE International Symposium on Circrmuits and Systems, May 2005. [5] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, "A 690-mW L-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder," IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404-412, Mar. 2002. [6] Y Chen and K. K. Parhi, "Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density panity check codes," IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. 1, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106 - 1113, June 2005. [7] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, "54 Mbps (3,6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder," in Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS): Design and Implementation, 2002. [8] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, "Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673-680, 1999. [9] J. Heo, "Analysis of scaling soft information on low density panty check code," Electronics Letters, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 219-221, Jan. 2003. 10] A Anastasopoulos "A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution," in IEEE Global Teleconimumnications Coniference 2001 GLOBECOM '01 vol 2 2001 pp 1021 1025. I 1] M. M Mansour and N R Shanbhag, "High-throughput LDPC decoders," IEEE Trans. VLSI Sysr., vol 11, no. 6, pp. 976 996, Dcc. 2003. [12] V. Stolpman, "Irregular structured Idpc codes," IEEE C802.16e-04/264, IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Working Group, Aug. 2004.
[13] J. Foerster, "Channel m1odeling sub-committe report," IEEE P802.15-
02/490rl-TG3a IEEE P802 15 Working Group for Wireless Personal
Area Networks (WPANs), Feh. 2003.
[14] G. Fettweis and H. Meyr, "High rate Viterbi processor: a systolic array solution," IEEE Jouroti n Seteced Areas in Coniniicarioos, vol 8,
no. 8 pp. 1520 1534, Oct. 1990.

129 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:47:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

tn mld

m2ld

m3ld

~~~Sel

Sel

Sel

-.......
compare
................

.i..n...1.......

.........."I.7
Si

......

....... in

......

.4 .2 ....

3

.....

Vo-17 '.o-l-Z

I

TJ

. fnz

9

-T,

_,

,,

_

II * f

mtn

mtn

mtn

mtn

(a) Bit-level pipelilned comparator

ml,,

m2,,

m3

(b) Bit-level desigln in the comparator

Fig. 4. The bit-level pipelined comparator de ignL

I1L] V. S. CerelnL, O. W~eiss T. G. Nill, I. Carew, J. Ashley, anLd R. Karabed, "A 550Mb/s radix-4 bit-level pipelinLed 16-state 0.25-,,m CM[OS Viterbi decoder," iln IEEE Internalta onl Ci aference on Appluccnon -Specific Systeoms, A luites tomes, an Pioc ss as, 2000, pp 195-201.

130 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:47:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

