IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006

1909

Termination Sequence Generation Circuits for Low-Density Parity-Check Convolutional Codes
Stephen Bates, Senior Member, IEEE, Duncan G. Elliott, Member, IEEE, and Ramkrishna Swamy, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) complement their popular block-oriented counterparts and may be more suitable in certain communication applications. These include streaming voice, video, and packet switching networks. In order to use these codes efficiently we must generate termination sequences similar to those used in conventional convolutional codes. In this paper, we present a construction method for termination sequence generation circuits suitable for field-programmable gate arrays and application-specific integrated circuits. This method uses linear algebra to determine the termination sequence for a small number of states of the encoder and converts these solutions into a sequential circuit. Results are presented for several realizations of termination circuits for a (128,3,6) LDPC-CC.
Index Terms—Coding and decoding, data communication, error correction codes, linear algebra, packet switching.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ESEARCH into the implementation of low-density parity-check encoders and decoders has, to date, focused almost exclusively upon low-density parity-check block codes (LDPC-BCs). Implementations of LDPC-BC encoders and decoders have been reported in industry and academia for both application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) and field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) [1]–[3]. These implementations can achieve good performance with respect to power and area when compared with other coding schemes [4]. They can achieve good performance at both low and high code rates and are therefore suitable for applications where the rate may vary with signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). It is for this reason that LDPC codes have recently been accepted into several communication standards (including DVB-S2, 802.16e and 802.3an).
A counterpart to LDPC-BCs was proposed by Felström and Zigangirov [5] which replaces the block-based parity-check matrix of an LDPC-BC with an infinite but periodic one. These codes, termed LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs), may be better suited to certain applications than their block counterparts. For example, LDPC-CCs are able to encode and decode arbitrary lengths of data without the need to fragment them into fixed-sized blocks. This may be advantageous for applications
Manuscript received March 10, 2005; revised December 9, 2005. This work was supported by the Semiconductor Research Corporation under Grant 1170.001 and by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council, Canada. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Wang.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4 Canada (e-mail: sbates@ece.ualberta.ca; elliott@ece.ualberta.ca; swamy@ece.ualberta.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2006.880313

such as packet-switching networks, streaming video and satellite radio [6]. In addition, several communication standards such as WiFi (802.11) and WiMAX (802.16) require a range of rates and frame sizes. LDPC-CCs may be an appropriate choice of error correcting code for such systems.
Several LDPC-CC circuits for both encoders and decoders have been reported to date. For example, results for a registerbased LDPC-CC decoder are presented in [7] and an FPGA implementation of a memory-based LDPC-CC decoder is presented in [8]. However, one disadvantage of LDPC-CCs when compared to LDPC-BCs is that, like traditional convolutional codes, it is necessary for a sequence encoded with the LDPC-CC to be terminated. This termination returns the encoder to a known state and therefore requires the transmission of a sequence that can not convey user information. However, this can lead to improved bit-error rate (BER) performance over the first and last bits of the encoded information. A discussion of this performance gain and how to achieve it in Ethernet packet switching systems is given in [6].
Although the termination of LDPC-CCs has been shown to be solvable using linear system solver tools [6], this solution does not yield a circuit that can be implemented easily in silicon. Unless termination circuits can be built that satisfy power and area constraints, the case for LDPC-CCs is made less attractive.
In this paper, we propose a general procedure for designing a termination sequence generation circuit for a LDPC-CC. This design algorithm treats the encoder as a finite state machine (FSM) and uses the concepts of the all-zero state and the superposition of single-one states to produce a termination sequence generator circuit that can be implemented efficiently in FPGAs and ASICs.
We review LDPC-CCs in Section II. In Section III, we present simulation results to show that LDPC-CCs have the same desirable BER performance as their block counterparts and we then present the LDPC-CC encoder in Section IV. We give an overview of the LDPC-CC termination problem and the algorithm used to produce termination sequence generation circuits in Section V. We discuss FPGA and ASIC implementations of these circuits in Sections VI-A and VI-B, respectively. We then discuss several optimization techniques in Section VII and an efficient ROM-based design in Section VIII. We finish in Section IX with conclusions and a discussion of ongoing and future work.
II. OVERVIEW OF LDPC-CCS
LDPC-CCs are similar to LDPC-BCs in that they generate code-bits based on a low-density parity-check matrix [4]. However, they differ in that any given code-bit is generated using

1057-7122/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006

only previous information bits and previously generated codebits. This implies that the generator matrix for LDPC-CCs is inherently lower diagonal and this simplifies the encoding process and reduces the encoding latency [4].
LDPC-CCs1 are defined by their infinite, but periodic, paritycheck matrix . For a rate 1/2 code, an information sequence

(1)

is encoded into a sequence

(2) such that

(3)

where

is a suitably chosen section of the infinite matrix

and has the form as given in (7). Note that

and

where

. We can determine the encoded

sequence for a rate 1/2 systematic LDPC-CC as follows:

(4)

(5)

where we assume

. Hence,

is generated

by an XOR operation upon a number of the

most recent

information bits and the most recent code bits. In this paper,

we assume that the number of ones in each row of , denoted

, and the number of ones in each column of , denoted ,

are constant. There are obviously a large number of potential

LDPC-CCs for most choices of , and . For a

discussion on construction methods for LDPC-CCs see [5], [9]

and [10].

The parameter specifies the memory of the LDPC-CC and

the BER performance of well-designed LDPC-CCs increases

with , as too does the encoder and decoder complexity. An-

other parameter of the code is the period of the repeating section

1The nomenclature used in this paper is based, in part, upon that presented in [5].

within . In this paper, we only consider LDPC-CCs with pe-

riod,

, i.e.,

(6)

An LDPC-CC code of this form therefore consists of

phases and the phase at any given time is denoted . This

implies that the encoding and decoding circuits also have a peri-

odic behavior that is controlled by . In our implementations

we assume that

, as shown in (7) at the

bottom of the page.

LDPC-CCs can be decoded using the message passing algo-

rithm similar to that used for LDPC-BCs [4]. The decoding op-

eration is performed by units termed processors [5]. Each pro-

cessor is comparable to an iteration in an LDPC-BC and, as

such, performance improves as we add more processors until

some limit is met. However, unlike an LDPC-BC iteration, each

processor is a physically independent unit consisting of delay el-

ements and a small number of check nodes and variable nodes.

Each processor is identical and the outputs of processor are

the inputs to processor . These inputs and outputs are log-like-

lihood ratios (LLRs) of the bit-error probabilities and for the

first processor the inputs are the channel LLRs. For more back-

ground on the structure of the LDPC-CC decoder see [5], [7]

and [8]. The replication of identical processors suggests that

LDPC-CC decoders might be well suited to ASIC and FPGA

implementations. The design effort can be spent developing one

processor, which can then be tiled as many times as required

to meet performance objectives or as permitted by die size or

FPGA resource constraints.

III. PERFORMANCE OF LDPC-CCS
One of the reasons that LDPC-BCs have become so popular is that they exhibit excellent error correction capabilities with iterative message-passing decoding. Therefore, if we wish to propose LDPC-CCs as an alternative, two questions arise, can LDPC-CCs also achieve this performance and what is the relative complexity of implementing LDPC-CC encoders and decoders compared to LDPC-BCs?
In Fig. 1, the BER performance of a number of regular LDPC-BCs and LDPC-CCs are compared. All codes were simulated using BPSK modulation on a channel with additive

...

...

...

...

...

(7)

...

...
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BATES et al.: TERMINATION SEQUENCE GENERATION CIRCUITS FOR LDPC-CC

1911

Fig. 2. TArchitecture for the (128,3,6) LDPC-CC encoder. u(t) is the information bit, v (t) is the corresponding code bit and (t) is the phase at time t.
The multiplexing units implement (5).

IV. LDPC-CC ENCODER

2 Fig. 1. Performance of a variety of LDPC-BCs and LDPC-CCs. For clarity, the
curves are labeled in order of increasing E =N required for 1 10 BER.

The LDPC-CC encoder is a simple block that has low latency

and an implementation size and complexity which is

.

This compares well with the complexity of LDPC-BC encoders,

which in the worst case are

but can, in practice, be made

TABLE I

to be

with no loss in performance [15]. However, with

KEY PARAMETERS OF THE LDPC-BCs AND LDPC-CCs PRESENTED IN FIG. 1 LDPC-CC encoders, there is no need to implement a control

mechanism to read in a block, shift the block into an encoder

and then encode an entire block, all the while transmitting data.

The encoder architecture for the (128,3,6) LDPC-CC dis-

cussed in Section III is given in Fig. 2. It comprises first-in

first-out (FIFO) delay lines for the code-bits and information

bits, two large multiplexors and a

input XOR gate. Four of

the five signals selected as inputs to the XOR gate are not located

at fixed taps on the delay lines. The two multiplexors, driven by

the phase signal, , are required to select these four inputs.

The output of the encoder comprises the most recent informa-

white Gaussian noise (AWGN). They were all decoded using

the belief propagation algorithm.

The codes are denoted

. The term represents

the memory (convolutional codes) or blocklength (block codes),

denotes convolutional code (C) or block code (B) and de-

notes random (R) or algebraic (A) construction. References to

tion-bit

and the code-bit

, which is the

output of the XOR gate. The code-bit is also fed back into one of

the delay-lines of the encoder. This feedback greatly increases

the strength of the code [5].

The state of the encoder at time is determined by the last

information bits and the last code-bits, and is denoted

the construction methods for each code are given in Table I.

(8)

It can be seen that both randomly and algebraically con-

structed LDPC-CCs have the ability to outperform LDPC-BCs. The rate 1/2 (2048,3,6)CR LDPC-CC performs slightly better than the rate 1/2 (100000,3,6)BR LDPC-BC and the rate 5/6 (128,5,7)CR LDPC-CC performs almost identically to the rate 1723/2048 (2048,6,32) LDPC-BC.2 Therefore, LDPC-CCs can outperform LDPC-BCs at both moderately low rates and at high rates.

Therefore the encoder can be considered as a finite state machine (FSM) with states. Since there are only two possible inputs and output choices at any time, this FSM has radix-2 inputs and outputs from each state. The next encoder state and the encoder outputs at time are a function of the present input,
, the encoder state, , and the present input phase, .

However, comparing codes on performance alone is not suf- A. All-Zero, All-One and Single-One States of the Encoder

ficient. The implementation complexity of the encoder and decoder for the codes must also be considered. In [14] the performance of LDPC-BCs and LDPC-CCs are compared for equal complexity cost and then for equal storage cost. In both cases the

The all-zero state of the encoder is that state where the previous information bits and the previous code-bits are all zeros. We denote this state by

LDPC-CC outperformed the LDPC-BC, therefore LDPC-CCs

(9)

are worthy of further study.

0 2Note that this LDPC-BC is not full rank and therefore its rate is slightly less
than 1 (6=32). This code has been selected for the IEEE 802.3an standard
[11].

where is a row vector comprising zeros. Obviously this state can be maintained by setting the input information bit to zero. The only other state that can be maintained in such a way

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006

TABLE II
H ENCODER OPERATIONS FOR A SIMPLE (3,2,4) LDPC-CC CODE AS DEFINED BY IN (10)

is the complementary all-one state. In this case the input must be held at logic one.
The single-one states of the encoder are those states where the total number of ones in the encoder delay lines is equal to one. The set of distinct single-one states is denoted .

B. Simple LDPC-CC

For example consider a simple (3,2,4) LDPC-CC with a parity

check matrix give in (10) at the bottom of the page.

The four lines shown in

give the non-zero entries for a

single period of the LDPC-CC. Thus, if these rows are indexed

as to

then

where

. Starting with

the right-most 1, the eight entries in the first row correspond to

(11)

We can therefore generate an encoder circuit similar to that in

Fig. 2 for this code. The corresponding encoder operations for

each of the four phases of this code are given in Table II.

Notice that in this simple example, two phases have the same

encoding operation. Although the memory of this code is only

three, the feedback of

into the encoder greatly increases

the power of the code [5]. However, this same feedback makes

it more difficult to determine a short termination sequence that

forces the encoder back to the all-zero state.

V. LDPC-CC TERMINATION

A. Overview of the Termination Problem

A termination sequence is a state-dependent sequence of in-

formation bits that takes the encoder from any given state back

to the all-zero state. In this paper, we focus on circuits which

generate termination sequences which ensure that termination

concludes at a chosen phase called the termination phase, .

We also concentrate on circuits that generate termination se-

quences that are of length

. Due to the length of the en-

coder FIFOs, this is the minimum termination sequence length

that works for all states of the encoder.

An overview of the termination process is given in Fig. 3.

Once the user data has been encoded, the

bit termina-

tion sequence must be appended in order to force the encoder

back towards the all-zero state. After the termination sequence,

either an additional zeros must be forced into the encoder

to flush the FIFOs or an end-of-frame (EOF) delimiter must be

transmitted [6]. The termination circuits proposed in this paper

do this zero-insertion automatically, so it should be noted that

in most communication systems there is no need to transmit

these zeros. See [6] for further details and an application of

LDPC-CCs with termination to Ethernet wireless and wireline

networks.

We denote the time when the first bit of the termination se-

quence is generated as . Since the length of the termination

sequence plus subsequent zeros is of length

, the phase

at time is the termination phase, , (i.e.,

). If the

user data does not conclude at the appropriate phase then we

must insert padding. Note that this padding and the termination

sequence add overhead to the system and hence their lengths

should be minimized.

Assuming that the user packet is encoded from the all-zero

state of the encoder at time

, the

bit information

sequence that returns an LDPC-CC encoder to the all-zero state

at time

can be determined by solving

(12)

It is straightforward to solve for the termination sequence, , using linear algebra. However, this gives little
insight on how to design a compact VLSI circuit to perform the equivalent task in real time. In addition, the linear system tool solves the entire sequence in parallel whilst we would prefer a circuit that generates the sequence one bit at a time, thus permitting the reuse of hardware for each bit of the sequence.

B. Generating LDPC-CC Termination Circuits

The generation technique developed in this paper is based on

the knowledge that termination bit is a function of the encoder

state at time and can be implemented by a series of XOR op-

erations on that state. In order to build a circuit to generate bit

we need only determine its value for each of the single-one

states of the encoder. The circuit can then be constructed by the

superposition of those results.

Let the technique presented in Section V-A, for determining

the termination sequence,

, from a given encoder

state, , and for a given termination phase, , be denoted by

. We can then solve for the termination sequence

...

...

...

...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(10)

BATES et al.: TERMINATION SEQUENCE GENERATION CIRCUITS FOR LDPC-CC

1913

Fig. 3. Termination process. The M + 1 bit termination sequence is appended to the end of the user data. An additional M zeros are required to flush the encoder FIFOs. The padding is used to ensure that the termination starts at time,  , such that ( ) =  .

for each of the single-one states of the encoder and note the positions of any ones in that termination sequence. A one at position
in the termination sequence indicates that the termination circuit for that bit should include an XOR term on the bit set to one in the encoder state. More formally, the algorithm to compute the elements of the XOR operation for termination bit is given by Algorithm 1.

TABLE III PREVIOUS INFORMATION BITS AND CODE-BITS STORED IN THE FIFO OF THE
S ENCODER (AND REPRESENTING THE ENCODER STATE, ( )) REQUIRED
TO BE XORed TOGETHER TO PRODUCE TERMINATION BITS FOR THE (3,2,4) LDPC-CC CODE

Algorithm 1: Circuit Construction for Termination Bit

1: 2: for all 3: 4: if 5: 6: end if 7: end for

do then

After the algorithm is run, the set contains those members of the encoder state that must be XORed together to produce termination bit . The function simply returns the type (information bit or code-bit) and the location of ones in the FIFOs of the encoder when it is in state .

C. Termination of the (3,2,4) LDPC-CC

Fig. 4. Average encoder state at each time instance for 10000 trials and three

termination requests for the (3,2,2) LDPC-CC.
For example, consider the simple code in Section IV-B. Since

the termination sequence is only a function of the given encoder

state, any encoder circuit must consist of a series of XOR opera- mined using 10000 trials. In each case, the Terminate signal was

tions upon the terms that define the state. Rather than consider asserted over the intervals

,

and

states with multiple non-zero terms in them, it is simpler to use

. Outside these periods the encoder was supplied

the four solitary-one states as the inputs to the XOR gates for any with random binary data. In all three cases is is clear that the en-

given phase. Note that this example is simplified further by the coder returns to the all-zero state for all of the 10000 trials. It is

fact that the only input to the XOR gate from the code-bit delay also clear that termination takes, at most,

time intervals.

line is at a fixed location. This is not the case in more complicated codes. When we run Algorithm 1 upon the simple code D. Termination of the (128,3,6) LDPC-CC

we get the results given in Table III.

Algorithm 1 was run for the (128,3,6) LDPC-CC discussed

Using the results in Table III, a simple simulation was con- in Section III. The cardinality of the are plotted in Fig. 5. It

structed to illustrate the termination of this code. In Fig. 4, the can be seen that this cardinality can be as large as 145. There-

average of the state of the encoder at time is plotted by rep- fore, an XOR gate with this number of inputs is required to im-

resenting as an unsigned number. The average was deter- plement the termination sequence generation circuit. Also, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006

that bit 3 is unusual in that

; therefore bit 3 can be chosen

at random or be used to convey user information because there

are no constraints on this bit in the solution of (12). As can be

seen in Fig. 5 this is the only bit with such a lack of constraints.

X Fig. 5. Number of terms required to be XORed together (j j) to produce each
of the 129 bits of the termination sequence for a (3,6), M = 128 LDPC-CC.
TABLE IV PREVIOUS INFORMATION BITS AND CODE-BITS STORED IN THE FIFO OF THE ENCODER (AND REPRESENTING THE ENCODER STATE, S) REQUIRED TO BE
XORed TOGETHER TO PRODUCE TERMINATION BITS 1,3, AND 129

E. The LDPC-CC Termination Sequence Generation Circuit

The architecture of the LDPC-CC termination sequence gen-

eration circuit is given in Fig. 6. The original LDPC-CC en-

coder in Fig. 2 is augmented with additional delay elements,

XOR gates and multiplexors. An additional registers are re-

quired to ensure that the encoder state at the commencement of

termination is not lost. A total of inputs are presented to a

multiplexor, which is driven by the phase signal. Based on the

present phase, , a number of inputs are presented to the XOR

gate inputs. This gate needs to be large enough to accommodate

up to

inputs.

The desire to terminate is indicated by asserting the Termi-

nate signal in Fig. 6. This automatically inserts any padding that

may be required (as indicated in Fig. 3), generates the termina-

tion bits and inserts these bits into the encoder. The circuit then

continues to insert zeros into the encoder, which maintains the

all-zero state, until the Terminate signal is de-asserted.

VI. IMPLEMENTATION AND SYNTHESIS RESULTS

A. FPGA Implementation
The encoder termination circuit presented in Section V-B was included into the FPGA encoder/decoder design presented in [8]. The termination control signal was brought to an on-board switch and the encoder output was brought out to an oscilloscope. The encoder was clocked at 40 MHz and it was seen that the encoder output could indeed be brought to zero when termination was requested.
The resource requirements of the basic encoder and the encoder with the termination circuit are given in Table V. The resource requirements of the decoder are also included to give a sense of proportion between the encoder and decoder resource costs.
It is clear from Table V that the termination circuitry increases the size of the encoder by a factor of seven. This is a significant increase and is mainly due to the large number of terms in the XOR operations required by this technique. The encoder, however, is still small with respect to the decoder, which requires at least 20 processors to operate effectively. Therefore, the termination circuit will not tend to dominate any transceiver containing both an encoder and a decoder.

B. ASIC Synthesis
The same HDL models used in Section VI-A were also synthesized for a 0.18- m CMOS process. The area requirements and minimum clock period were recorded for the three designs and the results are presented in Table VI. The comparative results for the encoder and processor are taken from [7]. Table VII shows the area requirements and timing performance for several actual terms of the encoder state that are required to be XORed versions of the (128,3,6) LDPC-CC termination sequence gentogether to produce termination bits 1,3 and 129 are given in eration circuits for a 0.18- m CMOS process. Table IV. This illustrates that can be large and consists of a The termination sequence generation circuit increases the combination of information bits and code-bits. Note, however, size of the encoder by a factor of eight. This is in agreement
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BATES et al.: TERMINATION SEQUENCE GENERATION CIRCUITS FOR LDPC-CC

1915

Fig. 6. Original LDPC-CC encoder with the additional circuitry required to terminate the code. The termination control signal is denoted as Terminate in this diagram.

TABLE V RELATIVE RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS OF THE (128,3,6) LDPC-CC ENCODER WITH AND WITHOUT TERMINATION CIRCUITRY. THE RESOURCES ARE THE LES OF AN ALTERA STRATIX S80. THE REQUIREMENTS FOR A 20-PROCESSOR
LDPC-CC DECODER ARE GIVEN FOR COMPARISON PURPOSES

attractive. In addition, the need to XOR the bits of the encoder state implies the encoder delay line must be extended. This also adds to the area and power of the final encoder design.
A. Complete Substitution Step

TABLE VI AREA REQUIREMENTS AND TIMING PERFORMANCE OF THE (128,3,6) LDPC-CC ENCODER WITH AND WITHOUT TERMINATION CIRCUITRY
FOR A 0.18-m CMOS PROCESS. RESULTS FOR A 20-PROCESSOR
LDPC-CC DECODER ARE GIVEN FOR COMPARISON PURPOSES
TABLE VII AREA REQUIREMENTS AND TIMING PERFORMANCE FOR SEVERAL VERSIONS
OF THE (128,3,6) LDPC-CC TERMINATION SEQUENCE GENERATION
CIRCUITS FOR A 0.18-m CMOS PROCESS

The first series of optimizations are based on the fact that

the last few information bits in the termination sequence will

be used in an encoding operation where most of the other XOR

inputs will be zero. This reduces the constraints on these terms.

For example, solving the parity check matrix for

yields

the result

. Therefore, we can replace

the

input XOR gate operation required for

with

a single wire to the FIFO code-bit delay line. A similar substi-

tution can be done for an additional 32 terms in the termination

sequence.

However, since the remaining 96 terms in the termination

sequence still require a high-fanin XOR operation, the savings

resulting from this optimization are not large. The resource

requirements for this circuit when implemented on the same

FPGA discussed in Section VI-A are given in Table VIII.

B. Partial Substitution

The remaining terms of the termination sequence can be op-

timized by using a back-substitution approach, where elements

of can be replaced with a previous term in the termination

with the results for the FPGA. However, the LDPC-CC encoder with termination is only half the size of an LDPC-CC decoder

sequence, and , i.e.

where

, and the non-intersect of

processor. This differs from the result for FPGAs in which

(13)

the termination circuit and processor were comparable in size.

This is because the ASIC version of the LDPC-CC decoder is We choose the that minimizes to further reduce the re-

a register-based design and, hence, is less area-efficient than source requirements of the decoder. However,

is still

the memory-based FPGA design. The maximum frequency of large and alternative optimization techniques are the subject of

operation of the encoder with termination is less than for the ongoing work by the authors.

original encoder. However, it is still not the critical block with As can be seen from Table VIII, the combined savings of both

respect to timing as the decoder must be operated at an even optimization steps are about 27% of the original termination

lower frequency.

sequence generation circuit and the final design is still about

VII. OPTIMIZATION OF THE TERMINATION CIRCUIT

five times larger than the original encoder circuit.

While the termination circuit developed in Section V-B has

VIII. ROM-BASED DESIGN FOR FPGAS

been shown to be fully functional and implementable at reason- The termination sequence generation circuit generates bits by

able clock speeds, the need to XOR many terms together is not XORing a large number of bits together. In Section VI the inputs

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2006

TABLE VIII FPGA RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS FOR SEVERAL VERSIONS OF THE (128,3,6) LDPC-CC TERMINATION SEQUENCE GENERATION CIRCUITS. FIFO LENGTHS
ENTRIES ARE FOR THE INFORMATION (CODE) BITS

Fig. 7. Original LDPC-CC encoder with the additional circuitry required to terminate the code. The termination control signal is denoted as Terminate in this diagram.

to the XOR gate were selected using multiplexors. An alternative The circuits constructed by this technique show that termina-

to this is to bring all inputs to an XOR gate via 2-input tion of an (128,3,6) LDPC-CC code is possible within

AND gates whose second input is driven by the contents of a bit-times. Whether this is an acceptable overhead or not is a

ROM.

function of the system in which the code is to be used and

This approach results in a more balanced design where is beyond the scope of this paper. However, ongoing work by

on-chip memory is used to replace some of the function- the authors is attempting to determine the appropriateness of

ality previously performed by FPGA logic elements (LEs). The LDPC-CCs for packet switching networks [6], [16].

LDPC-CC encoder with Termination discussed in Section VI-A The termination sequence generation circuits consist of a se-

was reimplemented along with an

word ROM with ries of FIFOs, multiplexors and XOR gates, driven by a single-bit

a wordlength of . The architecture of this ROM-based control signal. The circuits initially presented in this paper can

encoder is given in Fig. 7 and the resource requirements are be optimized using a variety of substitution techniques. They

summarized in Table VIII for an Altera Stratix EP1S80 device. yield designs which, although several times larger than the orig-

The ROM-based LDPC-CC encoder with termination re- inal encoder, are still small when compared to the decoder cir-

quires less than half the LEs of the most optimized circuit cuit. An FPGA implementation of these circuits was imple-

to date. The memory requirements are about 0.81% of the mented on an Altera Stratix S80 device and clocked at speeds of

available memory of an Alterra Stratix EP1S80. However this 40 MHz. In addition, standard cell ASIC synthesis results also

design can only be implementable as an ASIC if a ROM is showed that these circuits can be clocked at speeds of up to 189

included in the design.

MHz in a 0.18- m CMOS process.

IX. CONCLUSION AND ONGOING WORK

A further optimization of the circuit can be carried out for FPGA and system-on-chip (SoC) implementations where a

In this paper, we have presented an algorithm for the ROM is used to replace the multiplexors in the original design.

construction of LDPC-CC termination sequence generation This leads to a large reduction in the number of logic gates

circuits. These circuits are a vital part of any LDPC-CC en- required and is a more balanced solution for FPGAs where LEs

coder as they permit the transmission of finite blocks of data are complemented by on-chip memory.

whilst forcing the encoder back to the all-zero state. Without The authors are currently exploring additional optimization

these circuits the case for using LDPC-CCs over their block techniques based on more complex substitution techniques and

counterparts is weakened.

the pipelining of the XOR operations. They are also attempting to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BATES et al.: TERMINATION SEQUENCE GENERATION CIRCUITS FOR LDPC-CC

1917

reduce the required time to terminate by permitting termination from any phase. Other related research includes the investigation of architectures for LDPC-CC decoders and the integration of LDPC-CCs into existing and future communication systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank K. Zigangirov for discussions pertinent to LDPC-CCs and for supplying the matrix for the (128,3,6) code considered in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] C. J. Howland and A. J. Blanksby, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate 1/2 low density parity check decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[2] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “A 54 MBPS (3,6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Worksh. Signal Process., Oct. 2002, pp. 127–132.
[3] P. Urard, E. Yeo, L. Oaumier, P. Georgelin, T. Michel, and V. Lebars, “A 135 mb/s DVB-S2 compliant CODEC based on 64,800b LDPC and BCH codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC’05), Feb. 2005, pp. 446–447.
[4] C. Schlegel and L. Perez, Trellis and Turbo Coding. New York: IEEE Press, 2004.
[5] A. Jimenez-Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[6] S. Bates, Z. Chen, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity check convolutional codes for Ethernet networks,” in Proc. IEEE Pacific Rim Conf. Commun., Comput., Signal Process., Aug. 2005, pp. 86–91.
[7] R. Swamy, S. Bates, and T. L. Brandon, “Architectures for ASIC implementations of low-density parity-check convolutional encoders and decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Kobe, Japan, 2005.
[8] S. Bates and G. Block, “A memory based architecture for low-density parity-check convolutional decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Kobe, Japan, May 2005.
[9] A. Sridharan and D. Costello, Jr., “A new construction method for low density parity check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Worksh., Oct. 2002, p. 212.
[10] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matricies,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[11] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-gbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kobe, Japan, May 2005.
[12] D. J. C. Mackay, David Mackay’s Web Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes.
[13] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffer, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[14] A. E. Pusane, A. Jimenez-Felström, A. A. Sridharan, M. M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published.
[15] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.

[16] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity-check convolutional codes applied to packet based communication systems,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM’05), Nov. 2005.
Stephen Bates (S’94–M’03–SM’06) received the Ph.D. degree from Edinburgh University, Edinburgh, Scotland, U.K., in 1997.
He then worked for Massana, Dublin, Ireland, U.K., an Irish Fabless Semiconductor company specializing in high-speed Ethernet transceiver design. In 2003, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at The University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, as an Assistant Professor. His research interests include circuits and systems for high-speed wireline communication protocols, circuits for advanced forward error correction schemes and the use of reconfigurable logic to solve problems related to communications and bio-informatics.
Duncan G. Elliott (M’94) received the B.A.Sc. degree in engineering science and the Masters and Doctorate degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
He is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. His research interests include logic-enhanced memories, system-onchips, computer architecture, three-dimensional integrated circuit architecture, high-speed circuits, and microfluidic systems. His application-specific memory inventions have been adopted by industry. Previously, he has worked at Nortel, (Ottowa, Canada) in data communications, at MOSAID Technologies, (Ottowa, Canada) as a DRAM designer, and at IBM Microelectronics, (Essex) as a Contractor in applicationspecific memory design. He spent his last sabbatical at the MIT Microsystems Technology Laboratories, Cambridge. Dr. Elliott was the 2001 winner of the Colton Medal in microelectronics for his work on Computational RAM. He is a member of the IEEE Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Circuits and Systems, and IEEE Computer and Communications Societies and of member of the ACM.
Ramkrishna Swamy (S’05) received the B.Sc. (Cooperative) degree in computer engineering from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2004. He is currently working toward the M.Sc. degree in electrical and computer engineering also at the same university pursuing research in the areas of field-programmable gate arrays and VLSI architectures for low-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPC-CC).
His other research interests include circuit design and synthesis, digital application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) design and low-power system architectures for high-speed applications. He was the primary VLSI designer of the first ASIC of an LDPC-CC encoder and decoder Mr. Swamy was the recipient of the Best Paper in Session award at the Semiconductor Research Corporation’s (SRC) TECHCON 2005 conference.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:48:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

