2024 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) | 979-8-3503-6426-2/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/BMSB62888.2024.10608331

Adaptive LDPC Decoder with Performance Prediction Based on Average Mutual Information
Xia An1, Chao Zhang2, Kewu Peng3, Zhitong He4, Jian Song5 Department of Electronic Engineering,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{1ax23, 4hezt20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {2z c, 3pengkewu, 5jsong}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract—In mobile reception scenario, the channel quality usually shows some fluctuation, while traditional low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders which utilize fixed decoding algorithms have difficulties to balance the decoding complexity and threshold performance under different channel quality. Adaptive LDPC decoder needs performance prediction in order to guide the selection of decoding options. Traditional performance prediction based on signal-to-noise ratio and channel state information is not precise enough to help the selection of decoding options due to the rapidly varying instant channel state information or incorrect channel-parameter estimation. In this paper, we propose a novel adaptive LDPC decoder with bit-wise average mutual information (AMI) based performance prediction, which could switch between multiple decoding options according to the performance prediction results obtained from the computed AMI and the pre-determined AMI-performance relationship. The proposed decoder adopts multiple candidate decoding algorithms with distinct decoding complexity and threshold performance, and includes the option of direct retransmission. Thus, it could enhance the adaptability of the decoder to the varying channel quality, the robustness to the channel-parameter estimation error, and meanwhile cut down the computing resource waste caused by the avoidable decoding failure. We further propose a novel loop correction method which could effectively correct the channelparameter estimation error by using the decoder output to adjust the decoder input.
Index Terms—low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, adaptive LDPC decoder, average mutual information (AMI), decoding performance prediction, channel estimation error
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have been widely applied in many communication and broadcasting standards such as the 5th-Generation New Radio (5G-NR) [2] [3], Advanced Television System Committee (ATSC) 3.0 [4], and Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcast Advanced (DTMB-A) [5] [6]. Iterative message passing (MP) algorithms are usually used for LDPC decoding, and generally there exists a trade-off between the decoding complexity and threshold performance of the algorithm candidates.
The optimal belief propagation (BP) algorithm for LDPC codes, i.e., the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [7], could provide near optimal decoding threshold performance but requires relatively high computational resources and show sensitivity to the channel-parameter estimation error. The min-sum algorithm (MSA) [8] and its improved algorithms, e.g., normalized
The corresponding author of this work is Chao Zhang.

MSA (NMSA) [9], adaptive NMSA (ANMSA) [10], adaptive quantized and normalized MSA (AQNMSA) [11], have low computational and storage overhead and robustness to the channel-parameter estimation error, but degraded threshold performance.
The channel quality usually shows some fluctuation in the mobile reception scenario [12], especially under non-line-ofsight receiver conditions. When the channel quality is good, decoding algorithms with average performance and low decoding complexity are preferred. By contrast, when the channel quality is poor, or in other words, when the outage occurs, even the optimal BP could fail to recover the transmitted code-word. Thus, traditional LDPC decoders, which only adopt a fixed decoding algorithm, have difficulties to balance the decoding complexity and threshold performance under different channel quality, and may cause the waste of computational resource due to the avoidable decoding failure.
Adaptive LDPC decoders utilize multiple algorithms as LDPC decoding options, and predict the decoding performance in order to choose the appropriate decoding option before actual decoding [13]. However, existing methods of decoding performance prediction usually use signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio and instant channel state information (CSI) as the indicator of decoding performance [14], whose precision is not enough to guide the decoding option selection due to the channelparameter estimation error and the ambiguous relationship between instant CSI and decoding performance especially for high-order coded modulation systems. In the mobile reception scenario, the channel estimation error scales up as the moving speed increases. Under this condition, traditional methods based on SNR and CSI may become ineffective.
To achieve accurate prediction and appropriate decoding without performance degradation, the SNR estimation error needs to be corrected before the performance prediction and LDPC decoding. Traditional forward correction method [15] uses a preseted operating point depending on the previously estimated SNR and CSI, which essentially could not correct the preceding error caused by the inaccurate SNR.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel decoding performance prediction method based on accurate bit-wise average mutual information (AMI), which could provide accurate decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

performance prediction results independent of the fluctuated instant CSI. • Applying the proposed prediction method, we propose a novel adaptive LDPC decoder, which could switch between multiple decoding options according to the performance prediction results, and reach a flexible trade-off between the decoding complexity and threshold performance with under time-varying channel. • We further introduce a loop correction algorithm aiming at using the decoding output to correct the SNR estimation error and apply it to the adaptive LDPC decoder, leading to accurate decoding performance prediction results under the existence of SNR estimation error.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the novel decoding performance prediction method based on accurate AMI. Section III elaborates on the mode selection method of the adaptive LDPC decoder. Section IV provides the loop correction algorithm of SNR estimation error. Section V concludes the paper.

100

BLER

10-2

10-4

AWGN Rayleigh

10-6

-2

-1

0

1

2 SNR 3

4

5

6

7

(a) Performance prediction based on SNR. 100

BLER

10-2 10-4 CR = 1/3

CR = 1/2

CR = 2/3
AWGN Rayleigh

10-6

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55 AMI 0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

(b) Performance prediction based on AMI.

Fig. 1. Performance curves of SPA applied to 5G-NR codes (based graph 1, code rate 1/3, 1/2, 2/3, and lifting factor z=384) under BI-AWGN channel and i.i.d BI-Rayleigh channel.

II. DECODING PERFORMANCE PREDICTION BASED ON AVERAGE MUTUAL INFORMATION
The traditional decoding performance prediction method usually uses accurate SNR and CSI to predict the performance of the decoder, which shows limitation with the occurrence of fading and imperfect CSI at the receiver (CSIR). In this paper, we propose a novel decoding performance prediction method which directly use the decoder input soft information, i.e., the received log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) LLRch, to predict the decoding performance of the decoder.
The equivalent discrete base-band channel model used in the channel estimation can be expressed as:

yi = hi · xi + ni,

(1)

where xi, yi are the i-th transmitted symbol and the i-th received symbol, and hi, ni correspond to the channel gain and the additive noise when the i-th symbol is transmitted, respectively. After the channel estimation and equalization, the estimation value of hi (i.e., CSI) and SNR=∥hi∥2∥xi∥2/Var[ni] are obtained and applied in the further demapping process to generate the decoder input LLRch.
In the traditional method, an experiential block-error-rate (BLER) - SNR performance curve is preseted in advance, and the predicted BLER is obtained by finding the corresponding (SNR, BLER) point of the estimated SNR. By comparison, in our method, we also use an experiential performance curve, but utilize AMI as the indicator instead of SNR. In practice, AMI can be computed using the decoder input LLRch with the following expression:

1N

1

AMI = 1 − N

h(

),

1 + e−|LLRch,i|

(2)

i=1

where N denotes the code length and h(·) denotes the binary entropy function. Note that the above expression is still implicitly related to SNR and CSI, for they are employed in

the computing process of LLRch. However, our method could significantly alleviate the performance prediction error caused by the uncertainty of fading.
Considering the best case and the worst case, the experiential performance curves of SPA using the traditional method and our method are shown in (a) and (b) of Fig. 1 respectively, where we conduct experiments of 3 code rates and distinguished them with different colors (red for code rate 1/3, green for code rate 1/2, and black for code rate 2/3). In the best case, i.e., the binary input additive Gaussian white noise (BI-AWGN) channel, we get accurate hi with no randomness, and thus we can assume that hi ≡ 1 in simulation. In the worst case, i.e., the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) BI-Rayleigh fading channel, the randomness of hi reaches its maximum, and thus we assume that hi i.i.d. ∼ CN (0, 1), the standard complex Gaussian distribution, in simulation. The actual state always falls between these two conditions.
From the results we can observe that the performance curves of the traditional method vary in a large scale with the same SNR but different fading conditions, which means that the traditional method is vulnerable to the randomness of fading parameters, and fails to give accurate prediction when the selected channel model owns large deviation from the actual channel state. By contrast, the performance curves of different channel models converges in the AMI coordinate system, indicating that AMI is a better performance index than SNR. Thus, our method shows robustness to the fading parameters and could give accurate BLER prediction results regardless of the current fading state.
III. ADAPTIVE LDPC DECODER WITH AMI-BASED PERFORMANCE PREDICTION
In this section, we apply the proposed AMI based performance prediction method to guide the decoding option selection of adaptive LDPC decoders, and provide an instance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BLER

BLER

MODE

BLERpre

BLERth FAIL

MODE1

MODE2

AMI
AMIpre (a) Prediction

AMI

AMIth1

AMIth2

(b) Mode selection

Fig. 2. Prediction and mode selection process of an adaptive LDPC decoder.

TABLE I COMPARISON OF TYPICAL LDPC DECODING ALGORITHMS

Algorithm
SPA [7] MSA [8] ANMSA [10] AQNMSA [11]

Threshold
Good Poor Mid Mid

Complexity
High Low Mid Low

Robustness
Low High Mid Mid

100 10-1

MODE1:SPA MODE2:AQNMSA

with 3 decoding options including SPA, AQNMSA, and direct retransmission.

BLER =10-2
th 10-2

BLER

A. Basic Principles of the Adaptive LDPC Decoder
Adaptive LDPC decoders realize different decoding modes to match different channel qualities, and decide which decoding mode in the available decoding mode set is activated according to the current input before the start of the decoding.
In our proposed adaptive LDPC decoder, the BLER-AMI performance curve of each decoding mode and a BLER threshold value BLERth is preseted. Before real decoding, the decoder first compute the predicted AMI, i.e., AMIpre, using the input LLRch by (2). Then the predicted BLER performance BLERpre of each decoding mode is obtained using AMIpre and the preseted BLER-AMI curve. Finally, the decoder chooses the decoding algorithm that owns the lowest decoding complexity among all the decoding modes whose BLERpre ≤ BLERth. In the worst case, none of the decoding modes meets the above conditions, and the decoder chooses direct retransmission.
Fig. 2 illustrates the prediction and mode selection process of an adaptive LDPC decoder with 3 decoding options. Note that in real implementation, we will only consider decoding algorithms with a fairly good trade-off between threshold performance and complexity. In other words, if a decoding algorithm is inferior to another algorithm from all aspects, then the former will not be included in our available decoding mode set. Thus, in real implementation, we can simply predetermine the AMI threshold AMIth of the algorithms in the available decoding mode set, directly compare the predicted AMIpre with the AMIth set, and select the decoding mode whose AMIth is the highest that satisfies AMIth ≤ AMIpre.
Since our adaptive LDPC decoder utilizes an AMI based performance prediction method which shows robustness to the randomness of instant CSI, we expect a superior decoding performance of our adaptive LDPC decoder in terms of decoding success rate, compared with adaptive decoders with the traditional performance prediction method.
B. An implementation with 3 Decoding Options
Notice that while our decoder is robust to the inaccurated estimation of fading, the SNR estimation error still could

10-3

10-4

AMI =0.715
th1

AMI =0.725
th2

10-5

0.69 0.695 0.7 0.705 0.71 0.715 0.72 0.725 0.73 0.735 0.74

AMI

Fig. 3. Mode selection process of an adaptive LDPC decoder with decoding options SPA, AQNMSA, and direct retransmission.

affect our prediction accuracy. To alleviate this problem, we consider the robustness to SNR estimation error of different algorithms, as well as other properties related to decoding performance. Table I gives a comparison of typical LDPC decoding algorithms with respect to threshold performance, decoding complexity, and robustness. From the table we can observe that SPA owns the best threshold performance, and AQNMSA achieves a good balance bwtween the threshold performance, decoding complexity, and robustness to SNR estimation error. Thus, we consider SPA and AQNMSA as the decoding options of the adaptive LDPC decoder.
We present an instance of the proposed adpative LDPC decoder with 3 decoding options including SPA, AQNMSA, and direct retransmission. Fig. 3 illustrates the mode selection process of an adaptive LDPC decoder with 3 decoding options including SPA, AQNMSA, and direct retransmission. The performance curve is obtained using 5G-NR LDPC codes with base graph 1, code rate 2/3, and lifting factor z=384. By setting BLERth = 10−2, we determine the corresponding AMIth of the two decoding modes SPA and AQNMSA, i.e., AMIth1 = 0.715 and AMIth2 = 0.725.
IV. LOOP CORRECTION ALGORITHM
When the SNR estimation error occurs, the received LLRch is scaled by an unknown constant. A scaling factor α is usually

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1: Loop Correction

Input: previous decoder input LLRch,pre, previous decoder output bits, previous predicted

AMIpre, current decoder input LLRch,cur, scaling factor α

Output: current predicted AMIcur

1 AMIest ← AMI_EXACT(LLRch,pre, bits)

2 α ← AdjAlpha(α, AMIest-AMIpre)

3 LLRch,cur ← α · LLRch,cur

4

AMIcur

←1−

1 N

N i=1

h(

1 1+exp(−|LLRch,cur |)

)

used to rescale the received LLRch and obtain the adjusted LLR, i.e., LLRch,adj, with the following expression:

LLRch,adj = α · LLRch.

(3)

Traditional forward correction method of SNR estimation error uses the previously estimated SNR and CSI to determine an operating point Ct, and obtain the scaling factor α by sovling the following equation:

1N

1

Ct = 1 − N

h(

).

1 + e−α|LLRch,i|

(4)

i=1

Thus, it owns high computational complexity, and could not correct the preceding error caused by the inaccurate channel estimation. In this section, we introduce a loop correction algorithm to alleviate the SNR estimation error and further improve the predicting accuracy and decoding success probability.
The proposed loop correction algorithm is shown in Alg. 1. Our loop correction algorithm utilizes the decoding output to compute the exact operating point of the decoder, i.e., AMIest, compared it with the previouly estimated point, and using the comparison result to adjust the scaling factor α. The function AMI EXACT(·) uses the previous decoder input LLRch,pre and the previous decoding results, i.e., the successfully decoded bits, to calculate the exact AMI, which is immune from the SNR estimation error. The function AdjAlpha(·) adjusts α according to the difference between AMIest and AMIpre.
Our loop correction algorithm has low computation complexity since it does not need to solve the above equation. Meanwhile, it could adapt faster to the time-varying channel in real implementation, for it utilizes the decoding output to derive the exact operating point.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we first propose a novel decoding performance prediction method based on AMI for LDPC decoders, which could provide accurate performance prediction results in the presence of rapidly varying instant CSI. Then we apply the proposed prediction method to guide the performance prediction and decoding mode selection of adaptive LDPC decoders, and provide an instance of 5G-NR adaptive LDPC decoder with 3 decoding options including SPA, AQNMSA, and direct retransmission. The proposed decoder could adapt to the varying channel quality, and meanwhile improve the efficiency

of computing resource utilization. To further enhance the pre-
dicting accuracy and decoding performance, we propose a loop
correction algorithm for decoder input LLR, which utilizes the
previous decoder output to obtain the exact operating point
of the decoder. The proposed loop correction algorithm owns
low complexity, and could effectively alleviate the scaling
problem of decoder input caused by SNR estimation error.
In future work, we will conduct more simulation experiments
and provide detailed complexity analysis of the whole decoder
to sufficiently validate the advantage of our adaptive LDPC
decoder with AMI-based performance prediction and loop
correction of SNR estimation error.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Key Re-
search and Development Program of China under Grant
2021YFA0716602.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] 3rd Generation Partnership Project, “Technical specification group radio access network; nr.; multiplexing and channel coding (release 16), 3gpp ts 38.212 v16. 5.0 (2021-03),” 2021.
[3] F. Li, C. Zhang, K. Peng, A. E. Krylov, A. A. Katyushnyj, A. V. Rashich, D. A. Tkachenko, S. B. Makarov, and J. Song, “Review on 5G NR LDPC Code: Recommendations for DTTB System,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 155 413–155 424, 2021.
[4] K.-J. Kim, S. Myung, S.-I. Park, J.-Y. Lee, M. Kan, Y. Shinohara, J.-W. Shin, and J. Kim, “Low-density parity-check codes for atsc 3.0,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, 2016.
[5] J. Song, C. Zhang, K. Peng, J. Wang, C. Pan, F. Yang, J. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Xue, Y. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Key technologies and measurements for dtmb-a system,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 53–64, 2019.
[6] C. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. He, Y. Xue, and H. Yang, “High robust broadcasting over dtmb-a with low-rate ldpc codes,” China Communications, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 192–201, 2022.
[7] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” European Transactions on telecommunications, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 513–525, 1995.
[8] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, 1999.
[9] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, 2002.
[10] L. Fan, C. Pan, K. Peng, and J. Huang, “Adaptive normalized minsum algorithm for ldpc decoding,” in 2013 9th International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2013, pp. 1081–1084.
[11] X. An, C. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. He, and J. Song, “Adaptive Quantized and Normalized MSA Based on Modified MET-DE and Its Application for 5G-NR LDPC Codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 101 123–101 133, 2023.
[12] Z. He, K. Peng, B. Sun, D. A. Tkachenko, E. A. Popov, S. B. Makarov, and J. Song, “Evaluation of LTE-based 5G Terrestrial Broadcasting Systems for Mobile Reception Based on Average Mutual Information Analysis,” in 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB). Beijing, China: IEEE, Jun. 2023, pp. 1–4.
[13] Y. Z. Lan, H. G. Yang, and Y. Lin, “Design of dynamic adaptive ldpc decoder based on fpga,” Journal of Electronics & Information Technology, vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 1937–1943, 2015.
[14] K. Yan, F. Yang, C. Pan, and J. Song, “Reception quality prediction in a single frequency network for the dtmb standard,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 629–636, 2012.
[15] R1-1612084, Qualcomm, “Decoder Sensitivity,” 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

