1914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

EBDN: Entropy-Based Double Nonuniform Sensing Algorithm for LDPC Decoding in TLC NAND Flash Memory
Yongchao Wang , Debao Wei , Member, IEEE, Ming Liu, Hua Feng , and Liyan Qiao , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are widely employed in NAND flash memory to improve the reliability of data. However, LDPC has serious latency problems when the raw bit error rate (RBER) is high. The reason is that not only a sufficient sensing level is required to obtain accurate soft information but also a high number of iterations are needed. To reduce the latency of LDPC, an entropybased double nonuniform (EBDN) sensing algorithm is proposed in this article. The basic idea of this algorithm is to exploit the entropy to quantify the nonuniformity of intrastate and interstate. And the sensing levels are placed in a targeted manner based on the entropy, thereby significantly reducing the number of sensing levels without reducing the LDPC error correction performance. The experimental results show that the proposed algorithm can decrease the number of iterations of LDPC by approximately 70% and reduce the read latency by 34.52% compared with the traditional nonuniform sensing algorithm.
Index Terms—Entropy value, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, NAND flash memory, nonuniform sensing.
I. INTRODUCTION
W ITH the extensive application of triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash memory, its reliability has attracted much attention [1]. Low-density parity-check (LDPC), as a kind of powerful errorcorrection code, employs soft decision to maximize the retention of the initial information, which effectively improves the reliability of TLC [2]. Soft decisions decoding demands a fine-grained sensing level to obtain a more accurate log-likelihood ratio (LLR) to improve the decoding performance [3]. The fine-grained sensing level inevitably causes high latency, so reducing the latency of LDPC becomes a critical issue to be solved.
Many researchers have proposed different approaches to resolving the problem of high sensing latency. Dong et al. [4] found that the overlap region between two adjacent states is mainly located in the boundary region, so the approach of sensing the boundary region instead of the whole state is used, thus effectively reducing the latency. However, the nonuniform sensing approach proposed in that paper does not consider the differences between states. Qi et al. [5] proposed a sensing strategy that effectively improves the sensing performance by setting nonuniform sensing levels, but the approach also disregards the differences between states. Aslam et al. [6]
Manuscript received 9 June 2023; revised 24 August 2023 and 11 November 2023; accepted 29 December 2023. Date of publication 8 January 2024; date of current version 21 May 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61802088, and in part by the Aeronautical Science Foundation of China under Grant JZJJX20210009. This article was recommended by Associate Editor T. Mitra. (Corresponding author: Debao Wei.)
Yongchao Wang, Debao Wei, Hua Feng, and Liyan Qiao are with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150080, China (e-mail: 22b305017@stu.hit.edu.cn; weidebao@hit.edu.cn; 19B905059@stu.hit.edu.cn; qiaoliyan@hit.edu.cn).
Ming Liu is with the Testing Institute, Chinese Flight Test Establishment, Xi’an 710000, China (e-mail: liu130999@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2024.3350986

proposed a new sensing scheme using the voltage entropy function. Lin et al. [7] proposed a nonuniform sensing strategy with power functions. Both methods improve the decoding performance partially, but they ignore the differences between the different states. Li et al. [8] comprehensively considered three asymmetries of 3-D flash, which are interstate, intrastate, and cross-layer asymmetric, and thereby proposed a new sensing strategy to effectively reduce the latency for LDPC. The method sufficiently considers the differences between states and adjusts the sequence of sensing levels in a targeted manner, but the sensing levels are still equally spaced. All the above works lacked a comprehensive consideration of the nonuniform distribution of the raw bit error rate (RBER) between different states and within the same state.
This article tries to fill this vacant problem by employing entropy. The magnitude of the entropy in NAND flash memory directly reflects the reliability of the data, so it is feasible and effective to exploit entropy to quantify the error characteristics. In this article, we quantify the nonuniform error characteristics between different states and within the same state more comprehensively than other methods and thus set the sensing levels and optimization latency in a more targeted manner. And the contributions in this article are as follows.
1) For TLC flash memory, we derived the distribution characteristics of the intrastate entropy with the use of the entropy function, and based on this, an entropy-based intrastate nonuniform sensing strategy is proposed.
2) Measured the threshold voltage distribution of the flash memory chip and quantified the interstate difference based on the measured data with entropy, and thus proposed an entropybased interstate nonuniform sensing scheme.
3) Combined the two nonuniform sensing schemes to propose the entropy-based double nonuniform (EBDN) sensing algorithm. The experimental results showed that the decoding and latency performance of the proposed algorithm is significantly improved.
II. PROPOSED ENTROPY-BASED DOUBLE NONUNIFORM SENSING ALGORITHM
A. Entropy-Based Intrastate Nonuniform Sensing
Accurate LLR input is the key to improving LDPC decoding performance, but it requires a lot of sensing levels, which inevitably cause high latency, so how to accurately sense plays a key role in reducing latency.The region of high RBER is mainly located in the overlap region of adjacent states, i.e., the intrastate region, so designing an efficient threshold voltage sensing scheme for this region can effectively reduce the latency.
Entropy can be used to describe the degree of chaos in a system, i.e., the higher the entropy value, the more chaotic the system is. Therefore, the entropy function can be used to characterize the degree of chaos in different regions of NAND flash memory and design an

1937-4151 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: EBDN SENSING ALGORITHM FOR LDPC DECODING IN TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

1915

Fig. 2. Illustration of an entropy-based intrastate nonuniform sensing scheme.

Fig. 1. Entropy of state 1 and state 2 overlap regions of TLC flash memory.

efficient threshold voltage sensing strategy based on the obtained results in a targeted manner. Since errors in NAND flash mainly occur within the overlap region of adjacent states, the entropy value can be calculated within the overlap region. Suppose the threshold voltage distribution function can be fitted with a Gaussian function.
Then, the boundary values of the seven overlap regions in the TLC flash memory can be calculated by (1), Where f (i)(vi) denotes the threshold voltage distribution model function for the ith state of the TLC flash memory

f (i) vil f (i+1) vil

=

f (i+1) vir f (i) vir

=R

(1)

vli − μi+1 σi2+1

2

−

vli − μi σi2

2

= 2 ln

σi σi+1

R

vir

− μi σi2

2

−

vri

− μi+1 σi2+1

2

= 2 ln

σi+1 R σi

.

(2)

Equation (2) can boundary of the ith

boeveorblatapinaerdeaf,rovmir in(1d)i,cawtehsertehevilriignhdticbaoteusndthaeryleofft

the ith overlap area, R is a constant usually taken as 512, and the left

and right boundary values of the ith overlap area can be obtained by

associating (2). Then, the entropy value can be calculated by

P(state = i|v) =

si

si

f (i)(x)dx i f (i)(x)dx

(i

=

0,

1,

.

.

.

7)

(3)

H(v) = − P(state = i|v) log2 P(state = i|v).

(4)

i

P(state = i|v) represents the probability of state i at a given voltage v, si denotes a narrower range of areas around a given voltage v, and H(v) denotes the entropy value for a given voltage v.
In Fig. 1, the entropy value of the overlap region between state 1 and state 2 in the program–erase (P/E) 1400 cycles and 12-month retention of TLC flash memory is simulated. From Fig. 1, it can be seen that the entropy value at the boundary of the overlap region is low and at the center of the overlap region is high, and the entropy value is symmetric about the center. From this figure, we can conclude that the RBER is higher at the center of the overlap region and lower at the boundary of the overlap region.
From the conclusion of Fig. 1, an entropy-based intrastate nonuniform sensing scheme is proposed, and the specific details of the scheme are described in step 5 later. Fig. 2 is a schematic of the scheme. Since the entropy value at the center of the overlap region is the largest, a narrower interval of sensing levels is used, and the distance of sensing levels increases sequentially according to the decreasing entropy value from the center to the boundary. This scheme can be used to obtain more accurate LLR with the same number of sensing levels, which can reduce the latency more effectively.

Fig. 3. Interstate nonuniform distribution measured graph.

B. Entropy-Based Interstate Nonuniform Sensing

The RBER between different states in TLC flash is not uniformly distributed [9], i.e., the RBER is different in each of the seven overlap regions. If the traditional sense level setting scheme is used, the same number of sense levels for each overlap region will definitely cause unnecessary latency. Therefore, based on the actual characteristics, an entropy-based interstate nonuniform sense scheme is proposed.
Fig. 3 shows the measured graph of interstate nonuniform distribution with the Micron B16A chip, which has endured 1400 P/E cycles and 12 months of retention. Since the threshold voltage distribution of the erasure state cannot be measured, only the threshold voltage distribution between S1 and S7 can be obtained. It can be seen that the overlap regions of the most significant bit (MSB), center significant bit (CSB), and least significant bit (LSB) have significantly different sizes. Therefore, it is necessary to set different sensing levels according to the overlap areas.
From (2), the boundary value of each overlap area can be obtained: the left boundary is Bjl, the right boundary is Brj , and Bjm is the middle value of Blj and Bjr

Bjm

=

Bjl

+ Brj . 2

(5)

Then, the area of each overlap region is

S( j) = Bjm f (j+1)(x)dx + Bjr f ( j)(x)dx.

(6)

Blj

Bjm

The entropy value of each overlap region can be obtained from

P(region = j|S) =

S( j) j S( j)

(j

=

0,

1,

.

.

.

,

6)

(7)

H(S) = − P(region = j|S) log2 P(region = j|S).
j
(8)

From the above calculation process, we can obtain the entropy of the different overlap regions shown in Fig. 4, which is calculated based on the actual data in Fig. 3. Due to the low error rate between the erased state and state 1 [10] and the inability to measure the erased state, the entropy value of the overlap region 0 is assumed to be 0.
In Fig. 4, overlap region 3 corresponds to LSB, 1 and 5 correspond to CSB, and 0, 2, 4, and 6 correspond to MSB. From this figure, we can obtain the scheme for nonuniform sensing of interstate. It can be seen that the entropy of overlap region 3 is the highest, and therefore the region should be sensed preferentially. The entropy of overlap region 6 is the second, and therefore the region should be sensed first

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 6, JUNE 2024
TABLE I P/E CYCLES AND RETENTION TIME RANGE CORRESPONDENCE

Fig. 4. Entropy of different overlap regions of TLC flash memory.

among the four overlap regions of MSB. Similarly, overlap region 1 should be sensed preferentially among the two overlap regions of CSB. According to the proposed quantization algorithm, the total interstate nonuniform sensing order in the case of Fig. 4 is 3 > 6 > 1 > 2 > 5 > 4 > 0, i.e., overlap 3 is the first to add the sensing levels, and overlap 1 is the last.

C. Entropy-Based Double Nonuniform Sensing

As discussed above, the error characteristics of nonuniform dis-

tribution in the interstate and intrastate are introduced, respectively,

and a sensing strategy for each of the two cases is proposed by using

entropy. In the following, we will combine these two strategies to

propose an EBDN sensing algorithm.

The EBDN sensing algorithm can be divided into two processes:

first, building a range correspondence table, and second, reading data

for LDPC decoding. The table building process is an offline operation

that does not take time in the reading process, and only one table

building process is needed for subsequent use on the same type of

chip. The steps to build a range correspondence table are as follows.

Step 1: First, each set of P/E cycles and retention tests is performed

on several blocks of flash memory chips, where the number of P/E

cycles and the retention time parameters can be taken as the middle

value of each range.

Step 2: Reading the threshold voltage for each group of tests and

fitting the threshold voltage function.

andStethpe3i:nNteermxte, dciaaltceulvaatleuethBe mjlefftobroeuancdharoyveBrljl,aptherergiigohnt

boundary Brj with (2) and

(5).

Step 4: Calculating the entropy values of each overlap region

by using the threshold voltage distribution function, left and right

boundary values, and the middle value so as to determine the sensing

sequence.

Step 5: Based on the entropy characteristics inside each overlap

region, the location of the sensing levels is divided by the results

obtained in step 3. For the left side of Fig. 1, the overlap region is

first divided into 16 intervals according to the range of the overlap

region and the minimum offset voltage step. And according to the

entropy high in the middle and low on both sides in Fig. 1, the sensing

voltages are placed in the relative positions of 3, 5, and 8.

Step 6: According to the divided sensing level interval, the

corresponding LLR value is calculated and tabulated.

Since soft decisions are not required at the earlier stages of flash

memory lifetime, the EBDN algorithm is mainly applied to the middle

and later stages of lifetime. Table I corresponds to the ranges of

different P/E cycles and retention times calculated by steps 1–6,

which can be used to find the corresponding Search. Search 1–4 are

also tables created in advance according to steps 1–6, which contain

the entropy of each overlap region, the order and location of the seven

sense level placements in each overlap region, and the LLR calculated

by the corresponding location. For example, when the P/E cycles and

retention are identified, the corresponding Search can be found in

Algorithm 1 Workflow of the EBDN Sensing Algorithm

1: Start read

2: Hard read with 1 level per overlap region

3: if read success then

4: return READ SUCCESS

5: else

6: Check P/E cycles and retention times for flash memory manage-

ment records

7: Search for the corresponding range

8: Confirmation of sensing level placement

9: Read the next sensing level in the order of entropy

10: if read success then

11:

return READ SUCCESS

12: else

13:

while read level <max level do

14:

LDPC reads with the next sensing level

15:

if read success then

16:

return READ SUCCESS

17:

end if

18:

end while

19:

return READ FAILURE

20: end if

21: end if

Table I. Then, the order and location of sense level placement and the LLR can be identified according to Search, and the decoding can be completed.
Once all the range correspondence tables are built, the second process of reading data to complete the LDPC decoding can be started. Algorithm 1 describes the entire reading and decoding process. The critical step of the algorithm is to determine the placement of its sensing level based on the current P/E cycles and retention time. These can be obtained from the management records of the flash chip.
All of the above is the entire implementation of the EBDN sensing algorithm. Since the scheme accurately quantifies the interstate and intrastate nonuniform characteristics with entropy. It sufficiently reduces unnecessary sensing levels. Therefore, it significantly reduces the latency and improves the LDPC decoding performance.
III. TEST RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. LDPC Decoding Performance
The experiments in this article were performed on our own research platform [11]. The actual data is measured using the Micron B16A chip. LDPC uses a min-sum decoding algorithm where the code rate is 8/9 and the maximum number of decoding iterations is set to 30.
To confirm the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, it is necessary to analyze the decoding performance of LDPC. First, to verify whether LDPC can be decoded successfully, then, check if the number of decoding iterations increases.
Fig. 5 shows the BER comparison of TLC flash memory of LSB, CSB, and MSB before and after decoding for different P/E cycles with a 12-month retention time. Among them, Hard decision is a hard decision sensing method. Traditional is a traditional algorithm of nonuniform sensing with two soft sensings in each overlap region.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: EBDN SENSING ALGORITHM FOR LDPC DECODING IN TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

1917

Fig. 5. BER comparison of each scheme before and after LDPC decoding with different P/E cycles.

Fig. 6. Comparison of the number of LDPC decoding iterations for each scheme with different P/E cycles.

EBISN is an entropy-based intrastate nonuniform sensing algorithm with two soft sensings in each overlap region as well. EBDN is the EBDN sensing algorithm proposed in this article, which only performs two soft sensings in the two regions with the highest entropy in Fig. 3 and uses hard decisions in the other regions.
The solid line in Fig. 5 shows the BER before decoding, and the dashed line shows the after. And it can be seen that the BERs of LSB, CSB, and MSB are significantly different, which is not only related to the number of overlap regions but also related to the influence of each state by the retention time and the P/E cycles. In this figure, Hard decisions fail in both LSB and MSB, while Traditional fails in MSB. EBISN and EBDN can be decoded successfully in all situations.
Fig. 6 shows the comparison of LDPC decoding iterations under different P/E cycles for each scheme with a 12-month retention time. From the MSB figure, it can be seen that the proposed algorithm can still reduce the decoding iterations by about 70% compared with the traditional nonuniform sensing algorithm while reducing the number of sensing levels, and the performance is significantly improved.

B. Latency Analysis of EBDN
Latency is an important metric for evaluating LDPC performance
in flash memory. Since the calculations and tabulations of the algo-
rithm’s preliminaries are offline, i.e., they are all made in advance.
Therefore, the calculation and additional time overhead of this part
can be disregarded when analyzing the LDPC decoding latency, and
only the overhead of the online operation should be analyzed. The
read latency Tread is mainly composed of three parts, which are level sensing latency Tsenslat, transmission latency Ttranlat, and decoding iteration latency Titerlat. In this article, we set the sensing latency tdl of the hard decision level to 25 μs, the transmission latency ttl to 20 μs, the soft decision sensing latency tsl to 14 μs [12], and the decoding iteration latency til to 0.5 μs [13]. Where the transmission latency is mainly related to the number of transmitted information
bits, assuming that the total number of transmitted levels is Ns, the number of information bits to be transmitted is log2(Ns) . Then, the read latency is

Tread = Tsenslat + Ttranlat + Titerlat

= tsl × nsl + tdl × ndl + ttl × ntl + til × nil.

(9)

In (9), n denotes the number of the respective. Fig. 7 shows the comparison of latency. In this figure, the performance of the proposed EBDN sensing algorithm can reduce latency by at least 34.52% compared to the traditional nonuniform sense algorithm.

TABLE II PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS
Fig. 7. Comparison of the read latency of each algorithm with different P/E cycles.
Besides, EBDN reduces the number of sense levels in the low entropy overlap region compared to EBISN, so the latency is also significantly reduced. In addition, the algorithms proposed in [2] and [14] are also compared with traditional sense algorithms. Table II is the performance comparison of EBDN with them in terms of iteration and latency. It can be seen that the iteration and latency performance of the EBDN sense algorithm proposed in this article are significantly improved than theirs.
C. Storage Overhead Analysis of EBDN The main overhead of the proposed algorithm in this article
is the storage overhead, which requires storing Table I and the information about the interstate entropy values in Search 1–4. The P/E cycles in Table I account for 2 bytes each, for a total of 10 bytes. And retention time accounts for 1 byte each, and since the table only describes 10–14 months, additional ranges of 6–10 and 14–18 can be added to more fully cover the middle and late stages of flash memory usage, so retention accounts for 4 bytes. Search 1–4 can be represented by numbers only, so each accounts for 1 byte, for a total of 1∗4∗3 bytes. The stored entropy information accounts for 4∗3∗7 bytes. The total storage overhead is 110 bytes. The storage capacity of the Micron B16A chip is 256 Gb, so the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 6, JUNE 2024

storage overhead is 110/238, resulting in a much lower storage overhead.
IV. CONCLUSION
To reduce the latency of LDPC, the EBDN sensing algorithm is proposed in this article. First, the entropy is used to derive the intrastate nonuniform features, and an entropy-based intrastate nonuniform sensing scheme is presented. Then, the interstate nonuniform characteristics are quantified by entropy, and the entropy-based interstate nonuniform sensing strategy is proposed based on this. Finally, the EBDN sensing algorithm is proposed by combining both of them, and the advancedness of the proposed algorithm is verified by experiments. In particular, the performance of the proposed algorithm is significant in the case of high RBER, and it can achieve an approximately 70% reduction in the number of iterations and a 34.52% reduction in the read latency with negligible overhead compared with the traditional nonuniform sensing algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Liu, J. Rho, and W. Sung, “Low-power high-throughput BCH error correction VLSI design for multi-level cell NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. Design Implement. 2006, pp. 303–308.
[2] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[3] Y. Yeh, A. Fazeli, and P. H. Siegel, “Optimal placement of read thresholds for coded NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–7.

[4] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[5] S. Qi, D. Feng, and J. Liu, “Optimal voltage signal sensing of NAND flash memmory for LDPC code,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), 2014, pp. 1–6.
[6] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[7] X. Lin, G. Han, S. Ouyang, Y. Li, and Y. Fang, “Low-complexity detection and decoding scheme for LDPC-coded MLC NAND flash memory,” China Commun., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 58–67, Jun. 2018.
[8] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[9] D. Wei, Z. Piao, H. Feng, L. Qiao, C. Hu, and X. Peng, “TCSE: A target cell states elimination coding strategy for highly reliable data storage based on 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 5299–5312, Dec. 2022.
[10] Y. Du, Y. Gao, S. Huang, and Q. Li, “LDPC level prediction towards read performance of high-density flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 3264–3274, Oct. 2023.
[11] D. Wei, Y. Gong, L. Qiao, and L. Deng, “A hardware-software co-design experiments platform for NAND flash based on Zynq,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Embedded Real-Time Comput. Syst. Appl., 2014, pp. 1–7.
[12] Y. Du, D. Zou, L. Qiao, S. Liang, and C. J. Xue, “LaLDPC: Latencyaware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Massive Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), 2017, pp. 1–11.
[13] R. S. Liu, M. Y. Chuang, C. L. Yang, C. H. Li, K. C. Ho, and H. P. Li, “Improving read performance of NAND flash SSDs by exploiting error locality,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1090–1102, Apr. 2016.
[14] Q. Li et al., “Optimal read voltages decision scheme eliminating read retry operations for 3D NAND flash memories,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 131, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 114509.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:38:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

