2024 Wave Electronics and its Application in Information and Telecommunication Systems (WECONF) | 979-8-3503-6498-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WECONF61770.2024.10564623

The Comparative Analysis of Single Error Bursts Decoders for Linear Codes

A. M. Veresova, M. N. Isaeva, A. A. Ovchinnikov
Department of Infocommunication Systems and Technologies Saint-Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation
Saint-Petersburg, Russia amveresova@gmail.com

Abstract—The article considers the problem of correcting single error bursts, taking into account the influence of the structure of the linear block code parity-check matrix on the performance of decoding algorithms. A heuristic algorithm based on the determination of certain events and an algorithm based on dense information sets for correcting single error bursts are considered. Codes based on a block-permutation construction, as well as random linear codes, are selected. Experiments have been conducted to evaluate the computational efficiency and error probability for the codes and decoders under consideration, taking into account the density of the parity-check matrices and the construction of the codes. It is obtained that when using a block-permutation construction, the heuristic algorithm shows a much lower probability of error with an operating time slightly inferior to the decoder based on dense information sets. However, when the structure of the sparse parity-check matrix changes, the decoding complexity increases, and with increasing matrix density, the complexity of the heuristic algorithm tends to exponential even with small burst lengths. For matrices that do not have a block-permutation structure, the algorithm based on dense information sets shows the best error probability and operating time. Thus, based on the comparative analysis carried out, it can be concluded that the task of correcting single error bursts can be solved with polynomial complexity regardless of the structure of the linear code and optimized taking into account this structure.
Keywords—error burst; information set; low-density paritycheck code; computational efficiency of decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid development of information and communication technologies, which is currently taking place, leads to a constant increase in the volume of transmitted data and the requirements for the speed and reliability of transmission of this data.
To successfully solve the problem of increasing the transmission speed while maintaining the required reliability, it is necessary to take into account the real parameters of the transmission medium. In particular, this concerns the nature of noise occurring in the channel.
In real systems, noise is not evenly distributed over time, but changes its strength in accordance with physical parameters. To describe such noise, a Markov model can be used, described by two states: “bad”, in which the noise level is high, and “good”, in which the noise is weak. According to this

model, the “bad” state of the channel leads to the formation of a cluster of errors, and in the “good” state errors occur rarely or are absent. At the same time, classical coding theory, as a rule, considers independent errors, and to deal with noise, an interleaving is used to transform the described cluster interference into uniform ones. According to information theory, such a transformation leads to a decrease in the achievable transmission rate at a given level of reliability, therefore, the construction of decoding algorithms that do not require changing the nature of noise is an important task.
In [1], error burst correction is provided by using a cascade encoding scheme with an internal low-density code. In [2], the construction of low-density parity-check code for a specific error model is considered, in which the burst is always located at the beginning of a word. In [3], the correction of multiple phased bursts is considered. In [4], a cyclic code design is proposed to correct a single error burst. In all the works considered, when correcting error bursts, classical methods of decoding LDPC codes for independent errors are used, and burst correction is provided by adjusting code structures or using cascading coding.
In this paper, we will consider the case when, during the transmission of a codeword, one error burst occurs that does not exceed a certain length, while there are no independent errors outside the burst. The problem of correcting rare errors outside the burst was considered, for example, in [5].
The article is structured as follows. Section Ⅱ describes code constructions for correcting single error bursts. The section Ⅲ presents algorithms for correcting such errors. The results of the experiments are presented in the section Ⅳ. Section Ⅴ contains conclusions on the results obtained.
II. LINEAR CODES FOR CORRECTING SINGLE ERROR BURSTS
A linear (n, k)-code is a k-dimensional subspace of a linear n-dimensional space of binary vectors with a basis G— generator matrix of the code. The basis H of an orthogonal subspace is called a parity-check matrix.
The ability of a code to correct independent errors is often evaluated using a minimum distance. It should be noted that both the task of determining the minimum distance and the task of decoding independent errors are NP-hard [6], [7]; therefore, in practice, subclasses of linear codes with a structure that allows for polynomial decoding complexity are used to correct errors.

979-8-3503-6498-9/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In channels with clustered errors, the effect of noise on transmitted information is often described using a single burst. By a single error burst of length b, we will understand an error vector, all non-zero elements of which lie in an interval of length not exceeding b positions. The article [8] shows that determining the correcting ability of the code when correcting single error bursts is a polynomial task for any linear code. This makes it possible to assume that the task of decoding single bursts may also belong to the class of polynomial problems.

In coding theory, relatively few code constructions are known to correct error bursts. These include cyclic codes (Fire codes, Reed-Solomon codes) and product codes. These codes, although they have polynomial decoding procedures, are not computationally efficient enough for modern transmission systems with high requirements for information processing speed and energy efficiency.

At the moment, one of the most commonly used code structures in communication standards are low-density paritycheck codes. They allow for extremely low error probabilities when using efficiently implemented encoding and decoding procedures. The low-density code is given by a sparse paritycheck matrix, and both a block-permutation construction and a random construction without a strict structure can be used. Due to the sparse and pseudorandom structure, low-density codes have low sensitivity to error grouping.
Consider a random block-permutation construction of the form (1), where each block Cij is a power of the cyclic permutation matrix. The ability of the LDPC code to correct independent errors strongly depends on the structure of the arrangement of non-zero elements of the parity-check matrix, and, as a rule, an increase in correcting ability is achieved by increasing the number of blocks (especially in the columns of the parity-check matrix).

C11

H

=

C21 M

C12 C22
M

L K O

C1ρ

 

C2 M

ρ

 

,

(1)





Cγ1

C γ

2

K

C γρ



It was shown in [9] that the correcting capability of such code when correcting single error bursts does not exceed the block size m, and is often equal to m – 1. Therefore, unlike increasing the correcting ability when correcting independent errors, it is advisable to use a small number of large blocks to increase the length of the corrected burst with fixed code redundancy.

In this article, we consider block-permutation constructions of low-density parity-check codes for correcting single error bursts. However, as will be shown, single bursts can be corrected quite effectively even for random linear codes of a general type. Therefore, we will also consider random constructions of parity-check matrices of different densities.

III. ALGORITHMS FOR SINGLE ERROR BURSTS DECODING
As mentioned earlier, there are few known code constructions for correcting error bursts. At the same time, the

code structure is often adjusted to the noise characteristics in the communication channel, and the decoding remains practically unchanged ([1]–[4]). For low-density parity-check codes, decoding for the Gilbert-Elliott channel was considered in [10], however, this method shows the best results with rapid changes in channel states, and does not cope well with single rather long bursts.
In this article, we will consider two different algorithms for correcting single error bursts.
A. Heuristic recursive algorithm based on determination of certain events
The first algorithm (we will call it HRWD, heuristic recursive window-based decoder) described in [9] is based on a heuristic that analyzes the design of the parity-check matrix in the current decoding window for a given syndrome and determines the reliable values of zeros and ones inside the burst. Initially, the algorithm was focused on correcting single bursts with block-permutation codes within their correcting capability, however, theoretically it can be used to correct bursts of longer length and any code structure.
The algorithm can be divided into two stages: heuristic analysis, mentioned above, and a recursive procedure based on directional iteration.
In the case of a regular block-permutation construction, the heuristic procedure allows you to quickly eliminate incorrect burst layout options, and the recursive part is not used or significantly reduced. However, as the density of the paritycheck matrix of the code increases, the depth of recursion rises, which leads to a noticeable increase in operating time up to exponential. To reduce computational complexity, a limit on the depth of recursion can be introduced in the algorithm, at which decoding fails, which leads to a deterioration in the probability of decoding error. The algorithm is guaranteed to correct all error bursts within the correcting capability, and beyond the correcting capability it finds the first codeword corresponding to the accepted syndrome.
B. Algorithm based on dense information sets
The second burst decoding algorithm considered in this article is based on the use of information sets (ISD, information sets decoder). An information set is called a set of k positions if the elements of the codeword at these positions uniquely define the codeword. This method provides the least decoding complexity when correcting independent errors with a random linear code, but this complexity is exponential. This is due to the need to form an exponentially large list of information sets, in which a set is searched that is not affected by distortions to ensure low error probabilities [11], [12].
However, when correcting bursts, the complexity of decoding by information sets can be significantly reduced, given the small number of possible burst locations. For each possible location of a single error burst, there is an information set outside of it. In the case of any noise that does not go beyond the package, this set will be error-free.
Thus, decoding consists of a precomputation stage— compiling a list of information sets for possible burst locations,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and a decoding stage. In the process of decoding, for each information set from the list, the corresponding codeword and the error vector corresponding to this word are calculated. The result of decoding is a codeword that corresponds to the most probable error vector from the point of view of some criterion. In the case of correcting single bursts, this criterion is the length of the error burst in the vector: it is assumed that short error bursts are more probable.
In addition, consider a modification of this method, which uses dense information sets (Dense ISD) [13]: information sets with a minimum difference between the numbers of the first and last positions are considered, which makes it possible to correct several locations of the error burst using one information set. This approach allows you to significantly reduce the length of the list and, accordingly, the complexity of the search during decoding, however, the search for dense information sets can be computationally intensive.

decoders. It can be seen that within the correction capability of the code, all error bursts have been corrected. At the same time, when the correction capability is exceeded, the probability of error when decoding using normal information sets quickly tends to 1. The use of dense information sets shows a significantly lower probability of error, but it also quickly exceeds the value of 10−1. When using a heuristic decoder, the probability of error begins to exceed 10−3 starting from about 2bmax.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To perform experiments, consider the block-permutation code A, consisting of 3×6 blocks of size m = 67, while its density is approximately 0.015. This construction gives (402,203)-code that is guaranteed to correct any single error burst of length not exceeding bmax = 66.
Next, consider (402,201)-code B, given by a random paritycheck matrix with a density of 0.03. The burst correction capability of this code is 92.
We also consider codes C and D, with random parity-check (201×402)-matrices with densities of 0.1 and 0.5. Their correcting capability when correcting a single error burst is 93 and 92, respectively.
A property of the heuristic recursive decoder is a significant increase in the depth of recursion with an increase in the density of the parity-check matrix. In order to limit the decoding time, in experiments, the recursion depth was limited to the values 10b and 100b, where b is the length of the error burst. If these values are exceeded, the decoder returns a decoding failure.
To employ decoders using information sets, it is necessary to build an array of information sets. The number of common information sets is n – b + 1, and they can be found relatively quickly (about 30-50 seconds) for all the structures under consideration.
The search for a dense information set begins with the interval k + Δ, where Δ = 0, 1, 2, .... For the block-permutation construction (code A), it was not possible to find dense information sets for small values of Δ, therefore, a binary search for Δ with a search time limit was used, and were found 5 dense information sets for Δ = 66 in 0.3 s.
Manual selection of Δ = 5 was also applied for code B and 3 dense information sets were found in 0.1 seconds. For codes C, D, the search for three dense information sets with Δ = 3 and Δ = 1 was completed in 24 s and 0.5 s, respectively.
Fig. 1 shows the dependence of the decoding error probability on the burst length for code A when using different

Fig. 1. The dependense of decoding error probability on the burst length for code D
Fig. 2 shows the dependence of the probability of decoding error on the burst length for code D with a density of 0.5. For such a code, decoding by information sets provides correction of error bursts up to correcting capability, then the probability of error quickly tends to 1. Dense matrix decoding using HRWD apparently requires exponential recursion depth. If we limit the recursion depth to 100b, as shown in Fig. 2, then the probability of error increases rapidly for small burst lengths (approximately more than b = 10).
Fig. 2. The dependense of decoding error probability on the burst length for code A
Fig. 3 and 4 show the dependence of the decoding time on the packet length for codes A and D, respectively. For code A, the best operating time is provided by the Dense ISD, since only 5 information sets are used. The ISD algorithm uses 337 information sets. HRWD shows an operating time comparable to Dense ISD with burst lengths within the correcting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

capability of the code, and with large burst lengths, the decoder's operating time increases noticeably and exceeds the ISD operating time approximately at burst length b = 120. At the same time, this decoder provides a significantly lower probability of error. Decoding by information sets does not depend on the length of the burst, but depends on the number of information sets. For a dense matrix (code D), HRWD decoding not only fails to correct error bursts even at small lengths, but also requires approximately exponentially increasing time.
Fig. 5. The dependense of decoding error probability on the burst length for codes with different density

Fig. 3. The dependense of decoding time on the burst length for code D

Fig. 6. The dependense of decoding time on the burst length for codes with different density

Fig. 4. The dependense of decoding time on the burst length for code D
Fig. 5 and 6 show the probability of decoding error and decoder operation time for parity-check matrices of different densities. For the ISD and dense ISD algorithms, both the probability of error and the running time do not depend on the density of the matrices, so the graphs show the results for only one code. When using HRWD, you can see that with increasing density, both the probability of error and the operating time increase monotonously rapidly.
Summarizing the results, it can be concluded that decoding using dense information sets is the most computationally efficient. A heuristic recursive decoder for a block-permutation construction provides a slightly worse time to a certain burst length, while showing significantly lower error probabilities for burst lengths significantly exceeding the correcting capability of the code. However, with increasing density and the absence of a block-permutation matrix structure, the operating time and the probability of HRWD error increase rapidly.

V. CONCLUSION
This article compares two decoding methods for correcting single error bursts. It is shown that for both random linear codes and specific constructions (block-permutation lowdensity codes), single bursts can be effectively corrected. For a block-permutation construction, the heuristic recursive decoder showed extremely low error probabilities when correcting bursts far beyond the correcting capability of the code, and in a time slightly exceeding decoding using dense information sets. For random codes with increasing density, the best option is to use dense information sets, including burst lengths beyond the correcting capability.
Thus, the task of correcting a single error burst can be solved with polynomial complexity for any linear code, and taking into account the peculiarities of the code structure, the decoding characteristics can be improved.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The paper was prepared with the financial support of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation, grant agreement No. FSRF-2023-0003, “Fundamental principles of building of noise-immune systems for space and satellite communications, relative navigation, technical vision and aerospace monitoring”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REFERENCES
[1] N. Xie, T. Zhang, and E. F. Haratsch, “Improving Burst Error Tolerance of LDPC-Centric Coding Systems in Read Channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 933–941, Mar. 2010, doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2009.2034012.
[2] M. Yang, Z. Pan, and I. B. Djordjevic, “FPGA-based burst-error performance analysis and optimization of regular and irregular SDLDPC codes for 50G-PON and beyond,” Opt. Express, vol. 31, no. 6, p. 10936, Mar. 2023, doi: 10.1364/OE.477546.
[3] L. Song, Q. Huang, and Z. Wang, “Construction of Multiple-BurstCorrection Codes in Transform Domain and Its Relation to LDPC Codes’, IEEE Trans. Commun.,” vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 40–54, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2019.2948341.
[4] S. Vafi, “Cyclic Low Density Parity Check Codes With the Optimum Burst Error Correcting Capability,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 192065– 192072, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3032837.
[5] [5] A. Veresova and A. Ovchinnikov, “About the Joint Correcting of Error Bursts and Independent Errors Using LDPC Codes,” 2023 XVIII International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (REDUNDANCY), Moscow, Russian Federation: IEEE, Oct. 2023, pp. 122–126. doi: 10.1109/Redundancy59964.2023.10330192.
[6] A. Vardy, “The intractability of computing the minimum distance of a code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1757-1766, Nov. 1997, doi: 10.1109/18.641542.
[7] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems (Corresp.),” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, Art. no. 3, May 1978, doi: 10.1109/TIT.1978.1055873.

[8] A. M. Veresova, M. N. Isaeva, and A. A. Ovchinnikov, “Estimation of Independent Errors and Bursts Correction Capability of Linear Codes,” 2024 Conference of Young Researchers in Electrical and Electronic Engineering (ElCon), Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation: IEEE, Jan. 2024, pp. 23–27. doi: 10.1109/ElCon61730.2024.10468456.
[9] A. Ovchinnikov, A. Veresova, and A. Fominykh, “Decoding of linear codes for single error bursts correction based on the determination of certain events,” Inf. Control Syst., no. 6, pp. 41–52, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.31799/1684-8853-2022-6-41-52.
[10] A. W. Eckford, F. R. Kschischang, and S. Pasupathy, “Analysis of LowDensity Parity-Check Codes for the Gilbert–Elliott Channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, Art. no. 11, Nov. 2005, doi: 10.1109/TIT.2005.856934.
[11] [A. Barg, E. Krouk, and H. C. A. van Tilborg, “On the Complexity of Minimum Distance Decoding of Long Linear Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, Art. no. 5, Jul. 1999, doi: 10.1109/18.771141.
[12] G. C. Clark and J. B. Cain, Error-Correction Coding for Digital Communications. Boston, MA: Springer US, 1981. doi: 10.1007/978-14899-2174-1.
[13] M. N. Isaeva and A. A. Ovchinnikov, “Correction of single error bursts beyond the code correction capability using information sets,” Sci. Tech. J. Inf. Technol. Mech. Opt., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 70-80, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.17586/2226-1494-2024-24-1-70-80.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

