IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 70, NO. 2, JUNE 2024

739

Low-Rate LDPC Code Design for DTMB-A
Zhitong He , Student Member, IEEE, Kewu Peng , Senior Member, IEEE, Chao Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Jian Song , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Digital terrestrial television multimedia broadcasting-advanced (DTMB-A) proposed by China is served as a 2nd generation digital terrestrial television broadcasting (DTTB) standard with advanced forward error correction coding schemes. Nevertheless, to adapt low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) scenarios such as in cloud transmission systems, LDPC codes with low rates are required for DTMB-A. In this paper, the new design of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is presented systematically. Specifically, a rate-compatible Raptor-Like structure of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is presented, which supports multiple low code rates with constant code length. Then a new construction method is proposed for low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes, where progressive block extension is employed and the minimum distance is majorly optimized such that the minimum distance increases after each block extension. Finally, the performance of the constructed DTMB-A LDPC codes with two low code rates of 1/3 and 1/4 are simulated and compared with ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our design.
Index Terms—Digital terrestrial television multimedia broadcasting-advanced (DTMB-A), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, low rate, progressive block extension, minimum distance.
I. INTRODUCTION
D IGITAL terrestrial television multimedia broadcastingadvanced (DTMB-A) [1] proposed by China has been accepted by International Telecommunications Union (ITU) as the international DTTB standard in July 2015 [2]. As a 2nd generation digital terrestrial television broadcasting (DTTB) standard together with European digital video broadcasting second generation terrestrial (DVB-T2) [3] and American advanced television systems committee (ATSC) 3.0 [4], DTMB-A is developed to support higher transmission capacity and stronger robustness compared to original DTMB standard [5]. As the core technology in the physical layer standard
Manuscript received 12 September 2023; revised 6 December 2023; accepted 16 December 2023. Date of publication 22 January 2024; date of current version 7 June 2024. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2021YFA0716602 and Grant 2022YFE0101700. This article was partially presented at the 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) [DOI: 10.1109/BMSB53066.2021.9547020]. (Corresponding author: Kewu Peng.)
Zhitong He, Kewu Peng, and Chao Zhang are with the Department of Electronic Engineering and the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: hezt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn; z_c@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Jian Song is with the Department of Electronic Engineering and the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China (e-mail: jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2024.3349790

of DTMB-A, the cascade structure with outer code and inner code is used as the capacity-approaching forward error control (FEC) coding scheme, and the inner code is LDPC codes with three code rates of 1/2, 2/3 or 5/6 and two code lengths of 61440 bits or 15360 bits, respectively.
Nowadays, there exists a large space for DTTB systems to develop to fulfill the rapid growth of users’ requirements and meet the challenges brought by rapidly developing wireless communication systems. For instance, cloud transmission systems [6] are proposed as a new transmission system for DTTB to increase the reception robustness and use the spectrum more efficiently, and low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) scenarios lead to the need to solve the issues of co-channel interference and multi-path distortion. Unfortunately, current coded modulation scheme in DTMB-A is hard to support low SNR scenarios. Hence, the introduction of LDPC codes with low rates such as 1/3 or 1/4 is beneficial for DTMB-A.
Recently, there are successful designs of low-rate LDPC codes with notable performance, such as Type-A LDPC codes of ATSC 3.0 [7] and LDPC codes employed in 5G new radio (NR) eMBB data channel [8]. Raptor-Like structure is employed in both of the aforementioned LDPC codes [9]. It is a typical multi-edge-type (MET) structure and has a simple encoding structure and capacity-approaching performance at low code rates. Hence, Raptor-Like structure is promising to be employed for low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes as well.
Moreover, other beneficial features could be introduced in the design of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes, such as rate-compatibility and length-scalability. For ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes, the parity-check matrices are designed independently for all the code lengths and code rates, and multiple code lengths and code rates could be supported by employing parity puncturing and information shortening [10]. Hence the ratecompatibility and length-scalability of ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes could be further improved. For 5G-NR LDPC codes, the parity-check matrices are designed with rate-compatibility and length-scalability. However, 5G-NR LDPC codes only employ the inherent rate-compatibility of Raptor-Like structure, such that the code length is not constant for nested rates, which is not suitable for broadcasting standards. To support ratecompatibility with constant code length, row-combining with edge variation (RCEV) [11] is a possible design method, and row combining-splitting with edge variation (RCSEV) [12] is employed in original DTMB-A LDPC codes to solve the ratecoupling issue. Nevertheless, RCEV and RCSEV might break the Raptor-Like structure and thus may not be suitable for the design of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes. Therefore, a new structure of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is required.

1557-9611 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 70, NO. 2, JUNE 2024

The error floor performance is crucial for LDPC codes in broadcasting, which is majorly affected by trapping sets under belief propagation (BP) decoding. Since directly finding trapping sets or the most harmful elementary/leafless trapping sets is generally hard [13], the girth and approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) values [14] are usually set as the criterion to select the candidates with excellent error floor performance. For Raptor-Like structure, however, cycles with the same girth and ACE values might not be equally harmful to the error floor performance. Hence improved cycle classification is proposed in [15] to select the candidates with lower error floor more efficiently. Furthermore, the minimum distance of LDPC codes significantly influences the error floor performance as well [16], which is usually not considered in previous LDPC code designs.
Note that the initial research of this work is shown in [17], [18], which constructs DTMB-A LDPC codes with single low rate. Compared to the initial research, the major innovation of this work is that rate-compatibility which supports constant code length of each rate is considered, and minimum distance is considered as the criterion, for minimum distance actually constrains the error floor performance of lowrate DTMB-A LDPC codes in [17].
Based on the discussions above, the contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows.
1) A new structure of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is presented. The parity-check matrices of various low code rates are nested in a larger fusion matrix, which enables the constant code length for these code rates. Moreover, the parity-check matrices of multiple higher code rates are naturally nested in the parity-check matrix of each single low code rate as well, thanks to the Raptor-Like structure. Furthermore, the quasicyclic (QC) structure is adopted, and smaller code lengths can be achieved by the nested lifting factors. The aforementioned structure could make hardware implementation fairly simple.
2) A construction method is proposed for low-rate DTMBA LDPC codes. In this method, the base matrix is constructed by progressive block extension, with minimum distance upper bound increased each block. The lifting is designed by multilayer tree-structured progressive block extension, whose idea is similar to our previous work [15]. As a difference, a block is considered as a base unit for extension rather than an edge, and the minimum distance is the major target to be optimized at small lifting factors, such that minimum distance increases after each block extension. The improved cycle classification and BLER performance evaluation are also employed as criteria, to better optimize the error floor performance.
3) The DTMB-A LDPC codes with low code rates 1/3, 1/4 are constructed as an example. Through simulation and comparison with ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes, the performance at both the waterfall region and the error floor region for constructed low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is demonstrated. Furthermore, the higher code rates nested in rate 1/3, 1/4 and the nested short code lengths are simulated as well. Simulation results show that the DTMB-A LDPC codes with rates 1/3, 1/4 have reliable performance, simple hardware implementation, and can further flexibly support multiple code rates and code lengths.

The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows. The code structure of our low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is presented in Section II. A construction method for our low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is proposed in Section III, and the DTMB-A LDPC codes with rate-1/3, 1/4 are constructed. In Section IV, the performance of constructed rate-1/3, 1/4 DTMB-A LDPC codes is demonstrated via simulation. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section V.

II. CODE STRUCTURE
In this section, a new structure of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is presented. Firstly, the original Raptor-Like structure is introduced, and then the new structure is presented, which supports various code rates with constant code length, and each rate has Raptor-Like structure. Furthermore, the quasi-cyclic structure is also employed, which supports the length-scalability.

A. Raptor-Like Structure

Raptor-like LDPC code originates from the rateless Raptor codes [19], and its parity-check matrix H can be represented as

H=

AG×K D(M−G)×K

CG×G E(M−G)×G

0G×(M−G) I(M−G)×(M−G)

,

(1)

where HU = [A C] denotes the highest-rate code (HRC) part and HL = [D E] denotes the incremental redundancy code (IRC) part. 0, I denote the all-zero matrix and identity matrix, respectively. As a multi-edge-type (MET) structure with more than one degree-1 column allowed, the Raptor-Like structure has performance advantages, especially at low rates. RaptorLike LDPC codes have been successfully employed in mobile broadcasting and communication standards, such as ATSC 3.0 [7] and 5G New Radio (NR) [20].
Rate-compatibility is an inherent feature of the Raptor-Like structure, since the parity check matrix of lower code rate can be extended from that of higher code rate. Nevertheless, the code lengths of supported code rates are not identical, which is not convenient for rate adaptation with the constraint of frame structure for broadcasting. In ATSC 3.0, Raptor-Like structure is employed for rates 2/15 ∼ 5/15 and 7/15, with the parity check matrix of each rate designed independently. As a side effect, the hardware implementation of encoders and decoders might be more complex.

B. New Rate-Compatible Structure
To decrease hardware implementation complexity and main-
tain the performance advantage of Raptor-Like structure, a new
rate-compatible structure is presented. As shown in Fig. 1, the parity-check matrices of rate R1 <
R2 < · · · < RT−1 < RT are nested in a larger fusion matrix. The code length of the parity-check matrix of each
nested rate Rt is the constant value N, and the numbers of parity-check columns and information columns are Mt and Kt, where Mt + Kt = N. Furthermore, the parity-check matrix of each rate Rt has Raptor-Like structure, and the sub-matrices At, Ct, Dt, Et, It are nested in the sub-matrices of the fusion matrix A, C, D, E, I, respectively, as Fig. 1 shows. Note that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: LOW-RATE LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR DTMB-A

741

Fig. 1. The new rate-compatible structure. The parity-check matrices of rate Rt(1 ≤ t ≤ T) with constant code length N are nested in the fusion matrix.

Ct ≡ C and is consistently recorded as C in Fig. 1, and G is the number of rows of the HRC part for all the nested paritycheck matrices.
The new rate-compatible structure makes the code length of various code rates constant, which is suitable to be employed in broadcasting. Moreover, the hardware encoder and decoder can be designed directly based on the fusion matrix, and the hardware implementation could be largely simplified. Since the partial parity-check matrices of higher rates are inherently nested in the parity-check matrix of each code rate Rt due to Raptor-Like structure, multiple code rates can be more flexibly supported for the new rate-compatible structure.
C. Quasi-Cyclic Structure and Length-Scalability
Quasi-cyclic (QC) structure is an implement-oriented structure, which can be viewed as a subset of the protograph-based structures. The parity-check matrix of QC-LDPC codes could be lifted from a smaller base matrix, where all the zeros are lifted to Z × Z all-zero matrices and all the ones are lifted to Z × Z circulant matrices, and Z is called the lifting factor. Note that only the binary 0-1 base matrix is considered in this paper. For each circulant matrix, the position of the non-zero entry in the first row is called the lifting value, which ranges from 0 to Z − 1.
For low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes, QC structure is employed for the convenience of description and hardware implementation. Specifically, the fusion matrix is lifted from a smaller matrix called the base fusion matrix, which has the same Raptor-Like structure as the fusion matrix. Furthermore, the base matrix with nested rate Rt is nested in the base fusion matrix as well. The base fusion matrix B is denoted as

follows.

B=

Ag×kT D(m1−g)×kT

Cg×g E(m1−g)×g

0g×(m1−g) , I(m1−g)×(m1−g)

(2)

where the parameters Mt = mtZ, Kt = ktZ, ∀1 ≤ t ≤ T, and G = gZ, N = nZ. Correspondingly, the sub-matrices A, C, D, E, and I of the fusion matrix are lifted from the sub-matrices A, C, D, E, and I of the base fusion matrix,
respectively. The HRC part of the base fusion matrix is
denoted as BU = [A C], while the IRC part of that is denoted as BL = [D E]. The base matrix with the nested rate Rt is denoted as Bt, which has a constant number of columns n.
Moreover, length-scalability is available with the QC structure. Specifically, a family of lifting factors {Zj = Z02j, 0 ≤ j ≤ J} is supported. For each given edge e in B, the lifting value sj(e) with lifting factor Zj satisfies

sj1 (e) ≡ sj2 (e) mod Zj1 , ∀0 ≤ j1 < j2 ≤ J,

(3)

i.e., the lifting with small lifting factors is nested in the lifting with large lifting factors through modulo lifting [21]. Although 15k and 60k are the two most widely employed code lengths in current broadcasting standards, the nested lifting is beneficial for potential shorter code lengths in future broadcasting. The introduction of nested lifting is beneficial for the lifting design and could simplify the hardware implementation as well.

III. PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION METHOD
In this section, the proposed construction method for lowrate DTMB-A LDPC codes is described in two parts, i.e., base matrix design and lifting design. Then, DTMB-A LDPC codes with rate-1/3, 1/4 are constructed as an example.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

742

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 70, NO. 2, JUNE 2024

A. Base Matrix Design
Based on the new structure presented in Section II, the base fusion matrix is designed directly, and the performance of each nested base matrix is considered in the design process. For the conventional base matrix design methods, the asymptotic decoding threshold predicted by density evolution (DE) is commonly set as the criterion to select base matrices with better performance. However, the asymptotic decoding threshold is only highly relative to the decoding performance at the waterfall region for long block lengths [22]. Error floor performance is significant as well for LDPC codes in broadcasting, and minimum distance is highly relative to the error floor performance. The minimum distance upper bound [23] of the given base matrix constrains the minimum distance of QC-LDPC codes constructed from that base matrix. As shown in [16], QC-LDPC codes constructed from the base matrices with optimized minimum distance upper bound have generally better error floor performance, and can be computed fast for Raptor-Like base matrices. Hence it is set as the major criterion in our base matrix design, and the asymptotic decoding threshold predicted by multi-edge-type (MET-) DE [24] is set as the complementary criterion.
Specifically, since the base matrices of QC-LDPC codes for broadcasting are generally large, the HRC part BU = [A C] is simplified to decrease the design complexity. In our design, g is set as 3, A is designed as an all-one matrix, and C is designed as a full-one lower-triangular matrix. With most of the column weights in BU not less than 3, the minimum distance upper bound performance is ensured. For the particular column in C with weight 1, the related column in E is designed full-one, to mitigate the bad effect on the minimum distance that the degree-1 column in C makes.
Hence the design freedom lies in the IRC part BL = [D E] except the full-one column in E, which is denoted as Bˆ L. For simplicity, the corresponding parts in Bˆ L of each rate Rt are assumed quasi-regular, i.e., the column degree distributions are near regular and have the form L(x) = αxa + (1 − α)xa+1(a ∈ N, α ∈ [0, 1]), and the detailed degree distribution of each rate Rt is optimized with the aid of MET-DE. Then Bˆ L is divided into multiple potential blocks Bˆ L,1, Bˆ L,2, . . . , Bˆ L,P according to the degree distribution above, which are ordered such that the nested base matrix Bt is determined when blocks Bˆ L,1, Bˆ L,2, . . . , Bˆ L,Pt are constructed, where the parameters P = P1 > P2 > · · · > PT−1 > PT > 0. Moreover, when the blocks Bˆ L,1, Bˆ L,2, . . . , Bˆ L,p are constructed, the partial base matrix Bpartial,t,p which is the partial matrix of Bt could be determined, and Bpartial,t,p := Bt when p ≥ Pt. Note that all the column weights in each block are set as not less than 1, to support the increment of minimum distance upper bound. However, the way of Bˆ L division depends on the specific degree distribution and could be flexibly adjusted, and an instance of division is shown in the design example below. Then the potential blocks Bˆ L,1, Bˆ L,2, . . . , Bˆ L,p are constructed in order via progressive block extension, and multiple candidates are reserved in each step of block extension to maintain the diversity of candidates and get possibly better

Algorithm 1 The Base Matrix Design for Low-Rate DTMB-A
LDPC Codes Input: Nested rates R1 < R2 < · · · < RT , Size mt × (mt + kt)
of base matrix with rate Rt, n = mt + kt. Parameters dth,p. Output: Base fusion matrix B.
1: Ensure the structure of B as in equation (2) and the
structure of its nested base matrices of rate R1 < R2 < · · · RT . 2: Ensure the parameter g = 3, A as full-one matrix, C as
full-one lower-triangular matrix, The rightmost column of
E as full-one column.
3: Get the optimized degree distribution of the corresponding part of each rate Rt in Bˆ L.
4: Ensure the P potential blocks Bˆ L,1, Bˆ L,2, . . . , Bˆ L,P to be constructed, and the parameters P1 > · · · > PT−1 > PT . {Progressive Block Extension}
5: Initialize the set of empty element 0,s = {()}. 6: for p ← 1 to P do 7: Construct candidate set p of (Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,p) from
previous sieved candidate set p−1,s. 8: For each candidate φ ∈ p, compute dp for φ as in (4),
which is denoted as dp(φ). 9: Select the candidates φ in p with dp(φ) > dth,p, get
the sieved candidate set p,s. 10: end for 11: Get the constructed Bˆ L,1, Bˆ L,2, . . . , Bˆ L,P from P,s. 12: Construct the whole base fusion matrix B based on Bˆ L,1,
Bˆ L,2, . . . , Bˆ L,P.

final performance. The product of the minimum distance upper bounds of all the partial matrices is defined as

T

dp = dmin,upp Bpartial,t,p ,

(4)

t=1

which is set as the criterion of sieving the candidates, such
that the minimum distance upper bound of all the nested rates R1 < R2 < · · · < RT could achieve a better trade-off. Note that the dmin,upp(·) in (4) for Raptor-Like structure is computed by the reduced-complexity method in [16]. When all the potential blocks Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,P are constructed, the whole base fusion matrix B is finally constructed. The detailed description of the
base matrix design is shown in Alg. 1, where the parameters
dth,p are determined flexibly according to the computation resources.
Note that the base matrix design method shown in Alg. 1
could actually be extended to other scenarios. For low-rate
DTMB-A LDPC design, the pertinent parameter selection is
crucial as well. Specifically, the nested rates are selected as R1 = 1/4 and R2 = 1/3, which have similar optimal degree distributions such that the nested structure would lead to
negligible damage to the decoding threshold performance of each rate. The parameters are set as T = 2, k1 = 30, k2 = 40, n = 120 and g = 3, as shown in Fig. 2. The column degree distributions of the corresponding part of rate R1 and R2 in Bˆ L are selected as L1(x) = x10 and L2(x) =

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: LOW-RATE LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR DTMB-A

743

TABLE I MET-DE ANALYSIS RESULTS OF DECODING THRESHOLDS AND MINIMUM DISTANCE UPPER BOUND OF CONSTRUCTED DTMB-A
BASE MATRICES AND ATSC-3 TYPE-A BASE MATRICES

10 42

x7

+

32 42

x8,

respectively,

and

the

row

degree

distributions

of the corresponding part of rate R2 is selected as R2(x) =

αx4 + (1 − α)x5, where α is to be determined. Note that

all the degree distributions above are selected with the aid of MET-DE. Then Bˆ L are separated into 10 potential blocks Bˆ L,1, Bˆ L,2, . . . , Bˆ L,10, with the column weight of each block

exactly equal to 1. As shown in Fig. 2, an natural restriction of these blocks is that all of Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,7 have 10 rows and with row degree distributions 0.8x4 + 0.2x5, Bˆ L,8 have 7 rows and with row degree distribution x5, both of Bˆ L,9, Bˆ L,10 have 5 rows and with row degree distributions 0.6x6 + 0.4x7.

The base matrix B1 with rate R1 is determined when the blocks Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,10 is determined, and the base matrix B2 with rate R2 is determined when the blocks Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,8 is determined. The examples of partial matrix Bpartial,t,p is shown in Fig. 2 for t = 1, 2 and p = 6, 9. Note that in the design

example above, since the number of potential candidates in p

is huge, several simple constraints are added to decrease the

number of candidates while maintaining the minimum distance

upper bound. For instance, all the rows in the same block

are designed non-intersecting, and the overlapped elements

of any two rows in the different blocks are designed as

few as possible, which is good for increasing the minimum

distance upper bound. Moreover, the equivalence of rows of

columns in each block is employed to decrease the number of

candidates.

The MET-DE analysis results of decoding thresholds and

minimum distance upper bounds of the constructed rate R1 = 1/4 and R2 = 1/3 base matrices are compared with the base

matrices of short/long ATSC 3.0 Type-A LDPC codes with

rate R = {3, 4, 5}/15, as shown in Table I. The decoding thresholds are observed at BER = 10−7 over binary-input

(BI-) AWGN channels. The simplified computation method of

the minimum distance upper bound for Raptor-Like structure

in [16] is employed. It can be observed from the results that

our constructed base matrices have nearly the same decoding

threshold performance and better minimum distance upper

bound performance than base matrices of ATSC 3.0 Type-A

long LDPC codes, which is good for lowering the error floor

of the final constructed codes.

Fig. 2. (a) The designed base fusion matrix B and its nested base matrices B1, B2 with rates R1 = 1/4 and R2 = 1/3, (b)(c) Partial base matrices Bpartial,t,p with t = 1, 2 and p = 6, 9.
B. Lifting Design Though Z = 128 and Z = 512 are the major lifting factors
for low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes, directly constructing the lifting values of Z = 128 is hard since the search space is so large such that random construction skills should be employed. Hence progressive lifting is adopted to reduce the search space and support shorter block lengths which might be employed in future DTTB standards. Since the base fusion matrix is large

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

744

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 70, NO. 2, JUNE 2024

and the matrix A in HRC part is defined as an all-one matrix, Z0 = 8 is chosen as the start of lifting design, which maintains a space large enough to optimize the lifting of HRC part. Thus a family of lifting factors = {Z = Z02j, 0 ≤ j ≤ J} with Z0 = 8 and J = 6 is defined and the lifting with lifting factors Z = Z0, Z1, . . . , ZJ is constructed progressively. Note that the lifting with lifting factor Zj1 is embedded in the lifting with lifting factor Zj2 via modulo lifting, for any 0 ≤ j1 < j2 ≤ J. The lifting design of lifting factor Zj is denoted as layer j, and the whole lifting design is a multi-layer procedure.
The notations which might be employed below are defined
as follows. Assume that the lifting value of each edge in
the base fusion matrix B with lifting factor Zj is determined, the parity-check matrix lifted from B with lifting factor Zj is denoted as Hj. Moreover, the parity-check matrix lifted from Bt with lifting factor Zj is denoted as Ht,j. The parity-check matrix lifted from the partial matrix Bpartial,t,p with lifting factor Zj is denoted as Hpartial,t,p,j. The matrix lifted from the block Bˆ L,p is denoted as Hˆ L,p,j.
In each layer j, tree-structured progressive block extension
is employed to design the lifting of the base fusion matrix B.
Specifically, the lifting of the HRC part is firstly constructed and then the lifting of blocks Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,P are constructed in order. Note that when the lifting of blocks Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,p is constructed, the partial parity-check matrix Hpartial,t,p,j is determined. Furthermore, tree structure is employed to reserve
diversified intermediate results for the lifting of the HRC part and blocks Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,P, which is beneficial for achieving better performance trade-off of partial parity-check matrices and then achieving better final performance of Ht,1, . . . , Ht,p. The tree in layer j is defined as Tj, with maximum P+2 levels, denoted as the root level and level 0, 1, . . . , P, respectively. The nodes in level p(0 ≤ p ≤ P) of Tj are candidates for the lifting of HRC part and blocks Bˆ L,1, . . . , Bˆ L,p, and the relation between nodes and their child nodes correspond to
the nested relation of lifting. Moreover, the nested relation of
the lifting of lifting factor Zj and Zj−1 should be considered for layer j > 1, i.e., the trees Tj and Tj−1 are related. Then the lifting design is similar to our previous work [15], and the
main difference is that a block is considered as a base unit for
extension rather than an edge.
As for the criterion of sieving the candidates, the improved
cycle classification combined with minimum distance test and
BLER performance evaluation are employed. Specifically, as
shown in [15], [17], the improved cycle classification criterion
classifies the cycles based on the girth g and the number of 1-CNs η, where 1-CN denotes check node which connects
to degree-1 variable nodes. For a given (partial) parity-
check matrix or its corresponding (partial) Tanner graph, each cycle type (g, η) is assigned a weight wg,η according to its harmfulness to the error floor performance. Then the weighted
number W of cycles is computed as follows

W = wg,ηng,η,

(5)

g,η

where ng,η denotes the number of type-(g, η) cycles. Then the candidates with W > Wth are pruned, where Wth is the pre-set

Algorithm 2 Lifting Design for Low-Rate DTMB-A LDPC

Codes

Input: The base fusion matrix B and its HRC part BU, blocks Bˆ L,1, . . . Bˆ L,P. The set of lifting factors {Zj = Z02j, 0 ≤ j ≤ J}, Parameter σ1 > σ2 > σth.

Output: Lifting of B with lifting factor ZJ. 1: for j ← 0 to J do

2: Initialize the tree Tj with only the root node. 3: for p ← 0 to P do

4:

Tree growth for nodes in level p of Tj (according to

Tj−1 and the nested relation of lifting when j ≥ 1).

5:

if σj,p > σth then

6:

Compute the weight number of cycles W for each

node in level p of Tj, and prune the nodes with W > Wth such that σj,p ≤ σ1 after pruning.

7:

Detect the minimum distance d of each node in

level p of Tj, and prune the nodes with d > dth such that σj,p ≤ σ2 after pruning.

8:

BLER performance evaluation to get the BLER at

given channel condition for each node in level p

of Tj, and prune the nodes with BLER > BLERth such that σj,p ≤ σth after pruning.

9:

end if

10: end for

11: end for

12: Get the finally constructed lifting of B with each lifting

factor Zj from tree TJ.

threshold value. Since the cycles with smaller g and smaller η are more harmful, the weights wg,η should satisfy
wg,η1 ≥ wg,η2 , ∀g, η1 < η2; wg1,η ≥ wg2,η, ∀g1 < g2, η. (6)
However, the specific values of wg,η could be flexibly adjusted in the design process. As an instance, suppose all the candidates have minimum girth g0, then a possible selection of wg,η is wg0,η = 2−η, ∀0 ≤ η ≤ g0, wg0+2,η = 2−η−2, ∀0 ≤ η ≤ 1, and wg,η = 0, ∀(g, η) ∈ {g = g0 + 2, η > 1} ∪ {g > g0 + 2, η ≥ 0}. The aforementioned selection of wg,η is employed in our design for low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes.
Furthermore, the approximate nearest codeword (ANC) algorithm [25] is employed to test the minimum distance of the given (partial) parity-check matrix. Meanwhile, the BLER performance evaluation tests the BLER of the given (partial) parity-check matrix at given channel conditions, which is beneficial for eliminating the trapping sets that are harmful but hard to detect.
The detailed description of the lifting design is shown in Alg. 2, where σj,p denotes the current number of nodes in level p of Tj, and the parameters σ1, σ2, σth denote the threshold values of employing minimum distance test criterion, employing BLER performance evaluation criterion and stopping the tree pruning in the current level, respectively. Note that Wth, dth, BLERth in Alg. 2 could be flexibly adjusted in the tree pruning process such that given conditions are satisfied. In actual implementation, details of the algorithm can be flexibly changed according to the discussions above and Alg. 2 is just a possible realization that is simple to describe.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: LOW-RATE LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR DTMB-A

745
TABLE II OBSERVED MINIMUM DISTANCE AND MINIMUM DISTANCE UPPER
BOUND FOR ATSC-3 TYPE-A LONG LDPC CODES

Fig. 3. (a) SNR-BLER performance curves for constructed rate-1/3 DTMBA LDPC codes and rate-1/3 ATSC 3.0 Type-A LDPC codes with QPSK over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channel. (b) Eb/N0-BLER performance curves for constructed rate-1/4 DTMB-A LDPC codes and rate-4/15 ATSC 3.0 TypeA LDPC codes with QPSK over AWGN channel and Rayleigh fading channel.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, simulation results are provided to demonstrate the performance of constructed rate-1/3, 1/4 DTMB-A LDPC codes. The simulation results of rate-1/3, 4/15 ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes with lengths 64800 and 16200 are provided as the benchmark. For constructed DTMB-A LDPC codes, besides the widely employed code lengths N = 15360, 61440, the shorter code lengths N = 3840, 7680 are considered as well, to show the length-scalability. The simulations are conducted over both AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels with QPSK. Standard BP decoding with layered schedule is adopted with maximum 25 iterations. Since Shannon limits of rate 1/4 and rate 4/15 have non-negligible differences over both AWGN and Rayleigh channel with QPSK, we provide the Eb/N0-BLER performance for constructed rate1/4 DTMB-A LDPC codes and rate-4/15 ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes, where Eb/N0 is generally a better indicator to compare the performance of LDPC codes with slightly different code rates.
As shown in Fig. 3, the constructed DTMB-A LDPC codes have a notable performance advantage over ATSC 3.0 TypeA LDPC codes at both rates with code length N ≈ 15k, owing to bigger base matrices that provide more space for performance optimization. However, for longer code length N ≈ 60k, the low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes show similar or even better performance compared to ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes

at most cases as well, even with slightly smaller code length and base matrices. Moreover, the performance of constructed DTMB-A LDPC codes with code lengths N = 3780, 7560 is shown in Fig. 3 as well, and no notable error floor could be observed. Hence the performance of constructed DTMB-A LDPC codes is demonstrated, with better rate-compatibility, length-scalability, and further support of shorter code lengths.
To further show the influence of minimum distance, the performance at BLER ≈ 10−5 over AWGN channel with QPSK is observed for constructed DTMB-A LDPC codes and ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes, and at least 20 block errors are observed at each case. As shown in Table II, undetected errors are observed for ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes with N = 64800 and R = {3, 4, 5}/15, where undetected errors mean the outputs of the decoder are incorrect codewords, and are more harmful among the errors. Moreover, it can be observed that minimum distance of these undetected errors is close to the minimum distance upper bound shown in Table I. Therefore, it can be conjectured that increasing the minimum distance might be beneficial for improving the performance at low BLER for ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes. By contrast, no undetected errors could be observed for constructed DTMB-A LDPC codes with N = 61440 and R = 1/3, 1/4, which further verifies the benefit of a larger minimum distance.
Furthermore, since the parity-check matrices of constructed rate-1/3, 1/4 DTMB-A LDPC codes both have Raptor-Like structure, partial parity-check matrices are inherently nested in the parity-check matrix of rate 1/3 or 1/4, and more code rates could be flexibly supported. As the instance, we consider the partial parity-check matrix Hpartial,2,4,6, which has code rate R = 40/83 near 1/2 and code length N = 42496, and nested in the rate 1/3 parity-check matrix. The performance of original DTMB-A LDPC codes with R = 1/2 and N = 61440 are provided as the benchmark [12], which has degree distributions particularly optimized at that rate. SNR gaps to Shannon limit of both codes at BLER = 10−4 over AWGN channel with QPSK are obtained via simulation and denoted by dSNRth,3 as shown in Table III. It can be observed that though without optimization of degree distributions, there is only 0.3dB SNR performance gap from Hpartial,2,4,6 to the original DTMBA LDPC codes, which is acceptable. Hence these nested higher code rates could be potentially employed in practical broadcasting scenarios as well. Moreover, according to the SNR loss analysis in [26], the SNR loss could be generally divided into the SNR loss from the base matrix, the SNR loss from finite code length, and the SNR loss from lifting design. Hence, the asymptotic decoding thresholds of these codes are predicted by MET-DE, and the gaps of SNR threshold to Shannon limit at BLER = 10−10 are computed and denoted as dSNRth,1 in Table III. The SNR gaps to Shannon limit predicted by finite block-length bound [27], [28] over AWGN

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

746

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 70, NO. 2, JUNE 2024

TABLE III COMPARISON OF ORIGINAL DTMB-A LDPC CODE AND
THE PARTIAL PARITY-CHECK MATRIX
channel with QPSK at BLER = 10−4 is computed as well and denoted as dSNRth,2 in Table III. These results verify that the performance loss of Hpartial,2,4,6 is majorly from the notoptimized degree distributions. Furthermore, through a simple calculation, it could be observed that the improved lifting design provides 0.13dB gain compared to original DTMB-A LDPC codes with rate 1/2, which further demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed construction method.
V. CONCLUSION To meet the requirements of low SNR scenarios in future DTTB systems, low-rate LDPC codes are beneficial for DTMB-A. In this paper, we present the new design of lowrate DTMB-A LDPC codes systematically. Firstly, a new structure of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes is presented, which supports multiple low code rates with constant code length, and more higher code rates could be flexibly supported with the aid of Raptor-Like structure. Then a construction method is proposed for low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes, where progressive block extension is employed and the minimum distance is majorly optimized. Finally, simulation results demonstrate the reliable performance with flexible lengthscalability and rate-compatibility of constructed DTMB-A LDPC codes. In the future, we will further investigate the application of new-type LDPC codes in DTTB standards, such as spatially-coupled LDPC codes.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Song et al., “Key technologies and measurements for DTMB-a system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 53–64, Mar. 2019.
[2] Error-Correction, Data Framing, Modulation and Emission Methods for Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting, ITU Rec. BT. 1306-7, Int. Telecommun. Union, Geneva, Switzerland, , Jun. 2015.
[3] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI EN Standard 302 755, Apr. 2012.
[4] Physical Layer Protocol (A/322), ATSC Standard A/322, 2017. [5] Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital
Television Terrestrial Broadcasting System, ETSI EN Standard 300 744, Aug. 2006. [6] Y. Wu, B. Rong, K. Salehian, and G. Gagnon, “Cloud transmission: A new spectrum-reuse friendly digital terrestrial broadcasting transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 329–337, Sep. 2012.

[7] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[8] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing Channel Coding (Release 16), Version 16.7.0, 3GPP, Sophia Antipolis, France, 3GPP Rep. 38.212, Sep. 2021.
[9] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.
[10] S.-K. Ahn, K.-J. Kim, S. Myung, S.-I. Park, and K. Yang, “Comparison of low-density parity-check codes in ATSC 3.0 and 5G standards,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 489–495, Sep. 2019.
[11] A. I. Vila Casado, W.-Y. Weng, S. Valle, and R. D. Wesel, “Multiple-rate low-density parity-check codes with constant blocklength,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 75–83, Jan. 2009.
[12] L. Fan, K. Peng, C. Pan, and J. Song, “Multiple-rate multiple-length QC-LDPC codes design with near Shannon limit performance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast. (BMSB), 2013, pp. 1–6.
[13] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hardness results on finding leafless elementary trapping sets and elementary absorbing sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 4307–4315, Jul. 2019.
[14] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[15] Z. He, K. Peng, and J. Song, “Multi-layer progressive tree-structured edge growth algorithm for nested lifting design of 5G-NR-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2836–2840, Dec. 2022.
[16] S. V. S. Ranganathan, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Quasi-cyclic protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes for short block-lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3758–3777, Jun. 2019.
[17] J. Song, Z. He, K. Peng, and C. Zhang, “MET-DE aided design of low-rate DTMB-a LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast. (BMSB), 2021, pp. 1–4.
[18] C. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. He, Y. Xue, and H. Yang, “High robust broadcasting over DTMB-a with low-rate LDPC codes,” China Commun., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 192–201, Mar. 2022.
[19] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 2551–2567, Jun. 2006.
[20] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[21] S. Myung, K. Yang, and Y. Kim, “Lifting methods for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 489–491, Jun. 2006.
[22] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[23] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Influence of Proto- and tanner-graph structure on minimum hamming distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 585–607, Feb. 2012.
[24] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” in Proc. Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece his 60th Birthday, Pasadena, CA, USA, 2002, pp. 24–25.
[25] X.-Y. Hu, M. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37577), 2004, pp. 767–771.
[26] S. Chen, K. Peng, J. Song, and Y. Zhang, “Performance analysis of practical QC-LDPC codes: From DVB-S2 to ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 172–178, Mar. 2019.
[27] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.
[28] T. Erseghe, “Coding in the finite-blocklength regime: Bounds based on laplace integrals and their asymptotic approximations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6854–6883, Dec. 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:34:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

