A Cascaded Channel Model and Hybrid Decoding for Spin-Torque Transfer Magnetic Random Access Memory (STT-MRAM). K. Cai1 and K.S. Immink2 1. Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore, Singapore; 2. Turing Machines Inc, Rotterdam, Netherlands
I. CASCADED CHANNEL MODEL AND ANALYSIS Spin-torque transfer magnetic random access memory (STT-MRAM) is a promising non-volatile memory technology which is widely considered to replace the dynamic random access memory (DRAM) [1]. However, STT-MRAM suffers from process variation induced variations of the access transistor size, the magnetic tunneling junction (MTJ) geometry and resistance, as well as random thermal fluctuations, all of which aggravate with scaling, leading to the write error, the read disturb error, and the read decision error [2]. In this work, we first propose a novel cascaded channel model for STT-MRAM that facilitates fast simulations and more importantly the theoretical design and analysis of memory sensing and channel coding schemes. In STT-MRAM, due to the lower spin-transfer efficiency and also the weaker transistor driving ability for the parallel resistance state to antiparallel state ( i.e. 0→1) switching, its write error rate P1 can be several orders of magnitude higher than that for 1→0 switching (denoted by P0) [2]. We thus first use a binary asymmetric channel (BAC) to model the write errors. As the read disturb error (with the error rate Pr) is similar to the asymmetric write error, it can be combined into the BAC model. We further use a Gaussian mixture channel (GMC) to model the read decision error, where the distributions of two Gaussian variables follow those of the two cell resistance states caused by process variation. The Gaussian distributions can be replaced if the resistances follow other distributions. We concatenate the above two channels, and obtain a cascaded BAC-GMC model (see details in Fig. 1) which provides a complete description of the STT-MRAM channel. For the proposed cascaded channel, we derive analytically its raw bit error rate, based on which we obtain the optimum hard memory sensing threshold as well as the channel dominant error events, for arbitrarily low error rate regions. We derive the channel log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) which enables soft-decision-decoding (SDD) for the cascaded channel. We further derive the optimum maximum likelihood (ML) decision rule and the ML metric, which provides much better performance than the conventional squared Euclidean distance (SED) metric in SDD (shown in Fig. 2). These theoretical works serve as basis for the design of advanced channel coding schemes. II. HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM In order for STT-MRAM to replace DRAM, its design needs to meet both the requirement of DRAM-like read latency of 10ns to 30ns [1], and the demand of a higher storage density. Correspondingly, the error correction code (ECC) adopted needs to have a low coding redundancy of about 10%, with a very short codeword length. The state of the art ECC used by MRAM is the (71,64) Hamming code [3]. The BCH code and the low-density parity-check (LDPC) code have the potential to further improve the reliability and density. However, it comes with the penalty of significantly increased decoding latency. Therefore, in this work, we consider the extended Hamming codes. However, instead of using hard-decision-decoding (HDD), we propose a two-stage hybrid decoding algorithm. That is, we first carry out HDD during the first-stage of decoding. If the HDD declares a successful error correction, output the decoded codeword. Otherwise, the decoding is continued with the secondstage decoding, using the Chase II decoder [4]. We apply the previously derived ML metric for the cascaded channel in Chase decoding, and the cascaded channel LLR is used to identify the least reliable Q-bit positions. While computing LLR, we quantize the GMC channel by L quantization bits, with 2L-1 quantization thresholds being determined by maximizing the capacity of the cascaded channel. In addition, we reveal that by leveraging on the additional error detection capability of the extended Hamming codes, the gain of the hybrid decoder is much greater than that with the normal Hamming codes. III. SIMULATIONS AND COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS Simulations use experimental data/parameters taken from [5], corresponding to a 45nm×90nm in plane MTJ under a PTM 45nm node, with µ0=1kΩ, µ1=2kΩ, and σ0/µ0=σ1/µ1. We assume P0 and Pr are two orders of magnitude lower than P1 although other values of P0 and Pr can also be simulated. Fig. 2(a) shows that for a fixed P1=10-4 and at the frame error rate (FER) of 10-5, the (72,64) extended Hamming code with hybrid decoding with

Q=2 and L = 3 bits quantization gains of more than 2% of resistance spread σ0/µ0 compared to HDD, and approaches the performance of the full Chase decoder with ML metric, thus enabling more system tolerance to process variations. Fig. 2(b) shows that for a fixed process variation of σ0/µ0=9.5%, the (72,64) code with hybrid decoding overcomes the error floor with HDD, and improves the maximum affordable write error rate to P1=10-4 with FER=10-5. This will facilitate reduction of the write pulse width and write energy [6]. Further analysis shows that although the complexity of the Chase decoder is much higher than HDD, it is only activated when HDD fails during the first-stage decoding, whose probability is approximately equal to the FER of HDD. At σ0/µ0=8%, the FER of HDD for the (72,64) code is 2×10-5, the complexity of the hybrid decoder is thus only about 4% higher than that of HDD. At lower error rate regions, the FER of HDD is even smaller, and hence the complexity increase is even less. The hybrid decoder can also be directly applied to other extended BCH codes. [1] Y. Jin, M. Shihab, and M. Jung, “Area, power, and latency considerations of STT-MRAM to substitute for main memory,” in Tech. Dig. The Memory Forum, Minneapolis, USA, Jun. 2014, pp. 1-4. [2] Y. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Li, A.K. Jones, and Y. Chen, “Asymmetry of MTJ switching and its implication to STT-RAM design,” in Tech. Dig. Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), Dresden, Germany, Mar. 2012, pp. 1313 – 1318. [3] https://www.everspin.com/file/162/download [4] D. Chase, “A class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 18, pp. 170-182, Jan. 1972. [5] Y. Zhang, X. Wang, and Y. Chen. “STT-RAM cell design optimization for persistent and non-persistent error rate reduction: a statistical design view,” in Proc. of IEEE/ACM Intern. Conf. on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD) 2011, San Jose, CA, Nov. 2011, pp. 471–477. [6] J. Yang, B. Geller, M. Li, and T. Zhang, “An information theory perspective for the binary STT-MRAM cell operation channel,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 979 - 991, Mar. 2016.
Fig. 1 Cascaded Channel Model
Fig. 2 Hybrid Decoding Performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:25:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

