A Detector-Aware LDPC Code Optimization for Ultra-High Density Magnetic Recording Channels. L. Kong1,2, K. Cai3, P. Chen3 and B. Fan2 1. Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China; 2. University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA; 3. Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore, Singapore
Aiming at further increasing the data-storage density beyond 1Tb/in2[1-3], bit-patterned media recording (BPMR), shingled writing (SW)/two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) have emerged as new promising technologies. However, with the reduction of the track pitch, inter-track interference (ITI) becomes a major impairment for these magnetic recording systems. ITI combined with the conventional (down-track) inter-symbol interference (ISI) forms a two-dimensional (2D) interference that severely degrades the performance of data storage systems. Motivated by the superiority of datastorage density, large attention has been turned to 2D-ISI channels. Although the symbol-based Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) 2D detector (2D-DET) [2] - hereinafter called full 2D channel detector-can provide optimal detection over such 2D-ISI channels, it has prohibitive complexity for the typical 2D data size. In [4], the well known suboptimal 2D-DET, iterative row-column soft decision feedback algorithm (IRCSDFA), has been further simplified using Gaussian approximation, the resultant simplified 2D-DET is referred as “GA-IRCSDFA”. Besides 2D channel detection, coding also provides a means to combat 2D-ISI. In [2], new low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes optimized for 2D-ISI channels detected using the 2D BCJR detector have been designed, and are shown to achieve better performance than LDPC optimized for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. LDPC codes optimized for 2D-ISI channels detected using 2D GA-IRCSDFA detector in [5], exhibit excellent error-correction capabilities, especially for high codeword lengths. However, the ISI-optimized LDPC codes are designed for a 2D-ISI channel detected by the specific 2D-DET, and code optimization procedure should be operated again for a new detector. Moreover, the 2D-DET EXIT curve cannot be expressed in closed form, need to be evaluated by Monte Carlo simulation, statistically averaged over a large number of 2D detection simulationsIn this paper, we present a detector-aware LDPC code optimization method for a 2D-ISI magnetic recording channel, adjusting the variance of the 2D-ISI channel log-likelihood ratios (L-values) according to the specific 2D-DET. The new variance builds a new bridge of LDPC code optimization between the ISI-channel and AWGN channel. Specifically, the a-posteriori mutual information of the 2D-DET is calculated. Then we re-model the distribution of L-values as an approximately Gaussian N(μ,2μ)based on the estimated mutual information of the 2D-DET. Finally, we can re-use the code optimization methods employed in the AWGN channel employing the new variance of L-values from the corresponding 2D-DET in 2D-ISI channels, instead of the original variance. Fig.1 shows the conditional probability density functions (PDFs) of the output L-values of symbol-based BCJR 2D-DET in a 4Tb/in2 ISI channel using Monte Carlo simulations, where the LDPC code with rate of 8/9 is employed. It is easy to observe that the re-modeled symmetric Gaussian distribution with variance 2μ and the LLR-values of 2D-DET are well matched for transmitted coded bit 0s and 1s, respectively. Thus, we conclude that the LLR-values of a 2D-DET can be approximated by a symmetric Gaussian distribution giving a specific 2D-DET and the EXIT chart can be applied to optimize LDPC codes for such 2D-ISI channels. In Fig.2, we compare the BER performance of our proposed LDPC codes with the 2D-ISI-optimized (Scheme 2) and AWGN-optimized (Scheme 3) for two different code lengths in a 2D-ISI channel with recording density of 4Tb/in2, where the degree sequences of the Scheme 2 and Scheme 3 LDPC codes are given in Table I of [2]. Fig.2 shows that the proposed LDPC codes (red lines) have a performance gain of about 0.2 dB over the codes of Scheme 3 (black dashed lines) at BER of 10-5 for all two different code lengths (Nc = 4608, 9216) in a 2D-ISI channel with recording density of 4Tb/in2. Furthermore, there is only small performance loss in the performance of the proposed codes when compared to the codes which are designed by the significantly more complex optimization approach at BER of 10-5 for all two different code lengths, and the proposed codes have a lower error floor at high SNR region. Based on the detector-aware LDPC code optimization method for 2D-ISI channels, new LDPC codes have been designed for 4Tb/in2 channels

2D-ISI. Monte Carlo simulations demonstrated that the new LDPC codes can achieve a larger performance gain over 2D-ISI channels than codes optimized for AWGN channels, and outperform the full 2D-ISI-optimized optimized codes in the high-SNR region due to their lower error floor. This work is supported by China NSF for Young Scientists (Grant No. 61501250, 61401099), the Natural Science Foundation for Young Scientists of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20140879), SRF for ROCS, SEM.,NUPTSF (Grant No. NY214015). [1] Yao Wang, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, “Multi-track joint detection for shingled magnetic recording on bit patterned media with 2-D sectors,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 52, no. 7, article sequence number: 3001507, Jul. 2016. [2] L. J. Kong, Y. L. Guan, J. P. Zheng, G. J. Han, K. Cai, and K. S. Chan, “EXIT-chart-based LDPC code design for 2D ISI channels”, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2823-2826, Jun. 2013. [3] Ahmed Hareedy, Behzad Amiri, Rick Galbraith and Lara Dolecek, “Non-binary LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels: error floor analysis and optimized code design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3194 - 3207, Aug. 2016. [4] J. Zheng, X. Ma, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and K. S. Chan, “Low-complexity iterative row-column soft decision feedback algorithm for 2D inter-symbol interference channel detection with Gaussian approximation”, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 4768-4773, Jun. 2013. [5] Y. L. Guan, G. J. Han, L. J. Kong, K. S. Chan, K. Cai and J. Zheng, “Coding and signal processing for ultra-high density magnetic recording channels”, 2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), page(s): 194 -199.
Conditional PDFs of the 2D-ISI channel L-values detected by 2D-BCJR detector in 4Tb/in2 magnetic recording channel with Eb/N0 = 4 dB
BER performance comparison with three schemes employed by BCJR 2D-DET in a 4Tb/in2 magnetic recording channel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:23:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

