722

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 4, APRIL 2017

Bit Mapping Design for LDPC Coded BICM Schemes With Multi-Edge Type EXIT Chart

Junyi Du, Lei Yang, Jinhong Yuan, Liang Zhou, and Xuan He

Abstract— In this letter, we consider the bit mapping (BM) design for regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) coded bitinterleaved coded modulation (BICM) schemes. We propose a check-node type distribution and develop multi-edge type extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) functions for the regular LDPC coded BICM schemes. Based on the EXIT functions, we propose a two-phase design method to generate the optimized practical BM in terms of the lowest decoding threshold for a given finite length LDPC code. Simulation results show that the proposed BM has a better decoding threshold compared with those of the existing works.
Index Terms— Bit mapping, BICM, LDPC, EXIT.
I. INTRODUCTION
B IT mapping (BM) in a bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) system denotes the way of mapping the coded bits to different modulation levels. For an M-ary modulation scheme, a trivial mapping strategy is known as the consecutive BM (CBM) [1], in which m = log2 M consecutive coded bits are mapped to a modulation symbol. High-order modulation schemes exhibit unequal error protection (UEP) property on coded bits, i.e., coded bits mapped to different modulation levels have different error probabilities. By considering this UEP property, [2]–[7] aimed to obtain a low decoding threshold for irregular LDPC coded BICM schemes. Steiner et al. [2] and Zhang and Kschischang [3] optimized the code degree distribution and BM jointly. In [4]–[7], BM design was considered for BICM schemes where the LDPC codes have already been given. Although irregular LDPC codes have better performance in waterfall region, regular LDPC codes are more attractive in systems where a low error floor and a simpler implementation are required [8]. To the best of our knowledge, [8] and [9] are the only works which aimed to design BMs for regular LDPC coded BICM schemes. Maddock and Banihashemi [8] proposed a simple but effective BM design method by swapping the variable nodes (VNs) and Du et al. [9] proposed a progressive edge growth algorithm to design the BM. However, they both exert a restriction on the check node (CN) degree and are only suitable for BICM schemes with low rate LDPC codes. On top of this, none of them provides extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) analysis for BM design.
In this letter, we aim to design BMs for practical finitelength regular LDPC coded BICM schemes without imposing
Manuscript received September 28, 2016; revised November 23, 2016; accepted December 23, 2016. Date of publication December 29, 2016; date of current version April 7, 2017. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was M. Baldi. (Corresponding author: Liang Zhou.)
J. Du, L. Zhou, and X. He are with the National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Communications, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail: lzhou@uestc.edu.cn).
L. Yang and J. Yuan are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2016.2646341

Fig. 1. Block diagram of an LDPC coded BICM scheme.
any restriction on the code rate. We first develop multiedge type EXIT functions for the CN decoder (CND) and VN decoder (VND). Based on that, we employ differential evolution to obtain an optimized CN type distribution (defined in Section IV) for regular LDPC ensembles in terms of lowest decoding threshold. We then propose an algorithm to design the practical BM for a given finite length regular LDPC code to approach the distribution. Note that this is different from [2]–[6], where the design of practical BM for finite length LDPC codes was not investigated.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Consider an LDPC coded BICM scheme as illustrated in Fig. 1. A bit sequence u is encoded to a length N codeword c by using a (dv, dc)-regular LDPC code. We employ a BM to reorder c into a new sequence b. Then the M-ary modulator maps m = log2 M consecutive bits {b0, b1, . . . , bm−1} from b to a complex symbol x according to the constellation χ.
Let n = nI + j nQ denote the channel additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), where nI and nQ are independent Gaussian variables with zero mean and variance σn2 = N0/2. The receiver obtains the channel observation y = x + n.
The demodulator calculates the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for each coded bit based on the channel observation y and feeds the LLRs to an LDPC decoder after demapping. Then the LDPC decoder estimates u by employing the sum-product algorithm.

III. UEP IN HIGH ORDER MODULATION SCHEMES

For a BICM scheme with ideal bit interleaving, the M-ary modulation channel can be considered as m independent parallel binary-input sub-channels [11]. For the k-th subchannel, k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , m − 1}, the mutual information (MI) between the channel input bk and output y is given by

I (bk ; y) = 1 − Ebk,y log2

x∈χ p(y|x ) , x∈χk p(y|x )

(1)

where χk denotes the subset of χ with the k-th bit bk ∈ {0, 1}. The expectation Ebk,y[·] is taken with p(bk) = 1/2 and p(y|bk) = 21−m x∈χk p(y|x ), where p(y|x ) is the channel conditional probability density function.

To show the UEP property in different sub-channels, we calculate the MI of the m = 8 sub-channels for the Gray

1558-2558 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: BIT MAPPING DESIGN FOR LDPC CODED BICM SCHEMES WITH MULTI-EDGE TYPE EXIT CHART

723

Fig. 3. A type-3 CN with three unreliable edges and three reliable edges.

Fig. 2. Sub-channel MI of Gray labelled 256-QAM.
labelled 256-QAM by (1) and show it in Fig. 2. Obviously, there are 4 different MI values of the 8 sub-channels. This suggests that the UEP property exists in the Gray labelled 256-QAM scheme. Similar observations can also be found in other Gray labelled high-order modulation schemes.

IV. EXIT FUNCTIONS MODELING

In this section, we develop EXIT functions for VND and

CND by taking into account the UEP property in a regular

LDPC coded BICM scheme. The UEP property results in

different LLR distributions on the edges in a Tanner graph.

Therefore, we employ a multi-edge type approach [10] to

describe these LLR distributions.

For a (dv , dc)-regular LDPC coded BICM scheme with α different sub-channels (α ≤ m), there are α different types of

edges in the Tanner graph. As a result, there are

dc +α −1 dc

CN

edge-type assignments in total. Obviously, the number of CN

edge-type assignments increases rapidly with α.

In our model, we assign the m sub-channels into two groups

based on their MI values as calculated by (1). We call the sub-

channels with the smallest MI value as unreliable sub-channel

group and denote the set by L. We call all other sub-channels

as reliable sub-channel group and denote the set by H .

In the example of Gray labelled 256-QAM shown in Fig. 2,

L = {3, 7} and H = {0, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6}. We denote by m L and

m H the number of sub-channels in L and H , respectively. If

a VN is connected to a sub-channel in L, it is termed as an

unreliable VN. Otherwise, it is termed as a reliable VN.

We note that, unreliable VNs are prone to send out small

LLR values in the iterative decoding process of an LDPC

coded BICM scheme. In addition, the output LLR values from

a CN are mainly determined by the minimum input LLR.

Thus, the iterative decoding performance is mainly determined

by the assignment of unreliable VNs to CNs. Based on this

observation, we divide the edges in a Tanner graph into two

types: 1) unreliable edges EL which connect unreliable VNs

and CNs; 2) reliable edges E H which connect reliable VNs and CNs. By using this simplification, the maximum number

of CN edge-type assignments is reduced to

dc +2−1 dc

= dc +1,

as the number of unreliable edges of a CN ranges from 0 to dc.

1) CN Types: A CN is called a type-i CN if it is assigned

with i unreliable edges EL , i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , dc}. Obviously, there

are dc + 1 CN types. Let us use a length-(dc + 1) vector

P = ( p0, p1, . . . , pdc) to store the fraction of different CN types in an LDPC code ensemble, where pi represents the

percentage of the type-i CNs. The elements of P should satisfy

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪0dc≤

pi ≤ 1 pi (i − 1)

=

dcm

L

/m.

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

i

=0 dc

pi

=

1

(2)

i =0

In this letter, we call P the CN type distribution.

2) CND EXIT Function: For a CN with degree dc, its

extrinsic information on an edge is determined by the type

of the other dc − 1 edges. We call the extrinsic information

on an edge as a type-k extrinsic information IEk,CND if there

are k unreliable edges EL in the other dc − 1 edges, where

k

∈

{0, 1, . . . , dc

− 1}.

Let

I

L A,C

N

D

and

I

H A,C

N

D

denote

the

a

priori information from EL and E H , respectively. The type-k

extrinsic information IEk,CND is written as (3), as shown at the

bottom of this page, where J (·) is defined in [12].

Consider a type-i CN, which is assigned with i unreliable edges EL . It provides type-(i −1) extrinsic information IEi−,C1ND and type-i extrinsic information IEi ,CND to the connected i unreliable VNs and (dc −i ) reliable VNs, respectively. A type3 CN is shown in Fig. 3. It provides IE2,CND to the three connected unreliable VNs and IE3,CND to the three connected reliable VNs.

Let us use two length-dc vectors U = (u0, u1, . . . , udc−1) and R = (r0, r1, . . . , rdc−1) to respectively record the distrib-
ution of extrinsic information types with regard to unreliable

VNs and reliable VNs. The elements uk and rk respec-

tively represent the fraction of the type-k extrinsic information IEk,CND sent to unreliable VNs and reliable VNs, where k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , dc − 1}. uk and rk can be calculated

from P as

uk

=

(k + 1) pk+1 dcm L /m

and rk

=

(dc − k) pk dcm H /m

.

(4)

IEk,CND(IAL,CND, IAH,CND) = 1 − J (dc − 1 − k)[ J −1 1 − IAH,CND ]2 + k[ J −1(1 − IAL,CND)]2 ,

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

724

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 4, APRIL 2017

Then the CND EXIT function for unreliable and reliable edges EL and E H are respectively written as

dc −1

dc −1

IEL,CND =

uk IEk,CND and IEH,CND =

rk IEk,CND. (5)

k=0

k=0

3) VND EXIT Function: The VND EXIT function for unreliable and reliable edges EL and E H are written as

IEL,VND(IAL,VND, σch)

2

= J (dv − 1) J −1 IAL,VND + σch2

(6)

and

IEH,VND(IAH,VND, σ ch)

=

1 J

i∈H mH

(dv − 1) J −1 IAH,VND 2 + σcih2 , (7)

respectively. Here, IAL,VND denotes the a priori information on edges EL and IAH,VND denotes the a priori information on edges E H , σc2h and σcih2 are the equivalent channel noise variances associated with the sub-channels in L and the i -th sub-channel in the BICM scheme, respectively.
We note that the multi-edge type EXIT functions developed in this letter are different from these developed in [3] and [7]. We take into account the edge type assignment in the CND EXIT functions, which enables the optimizing of BM for regular LDPC coded BICM scheme. However, [3] and [7] simplified the modeling of the CND EXIT function, which makes the function independent from the BM design and cannot be used in a regular LDPC coded BICM scheme.

V. PRACTICAL BIT MAPPING DESIGN
In this section, we propose a two-phase BM design method
to obtain an optimized practical BM in terms of lowest decod-
ing threshold for a regular LDPC coded BICM scheme. It can
be seen from (3)-(7) that the CND and VND EXIT functions
are determined by the CN type distribution P. Therefore,
the first design phase is going to find the optimal CN type distribution P∗ in terms of lowest decoding threshold for the
LDPC ensembles based on the CND and VND EXIT functions
developed in Section IV. The second design phase is going to
find a practical BM for a given finite-length LDPC code to approach the optimized P∗.
In the first design phase, we employ differential evolution [13] to obtain the optimized CN type distribution P∗ for (dv , dc)-regular LDPC ensembles. We summarize the procedure and explain the employed parameters in the following. As the size of P is dc + 1, we set the population number scaling with the size of P, such as 10 · (dc + 1) following [2]. To generate each candidate P, we first generate dc − 1 elements of P, s.t. 0 ≤ pi ≤ 1, using differential evolution. Then we calculate the other elements of P to satisfy (2). As all
elements in P have the same constraints, we arbitrarily select p1, · · · , pdc−1 in P to be generated by differential evolution. Both the crossover probability and differential weight are set
to 0.5. The maximum generation number is set to 1000. We do
not observe much improvement in terms of decoding threshold
by increasing the generation number further.

In the second phase, we aim to design a practical BM for a
finite-length (dv , dc)-regular LDPC coded BICM scheme. Here a practical BM represents the specific connections between
sub-channels and all VNs. We denote ϕ = {ϕ0, ϕ1, . . . , ϕN−1} as a practical BM, where ϕi ∈ {0, 1, . . . , m − 1} records the type of sub-channel connected to the i -th VN. For a given LDPC code with a specific bit mapping ϕ, we can calculate
its associated CN type distribution P. Note that the CN type
distribution P of a practical LDPC coded BICM scheme may not satisfy P∗ due to its fixed Tanner graph. Therefore, we aim
to find a practical BM ϕ whose CN type distribution P is close to P∗. Let d be the distance between CN type distributions P and P∗, which is written as

d=

dc i =0

| Nc

pi

−

Nc

pi∗|,

(8)

where Nc is the number of CNs of the LDPC code. Next, we propose a greedy algorithm to obtain the practical BM ϕ by
minimizing d. For a VN vi with ϕi ∈ L (or ϕi ∈ H ), a VN v j , j = i ,
is called vi ’s paired-VN if ϕi ∈ H (or ϕi ∈ L). The design algorithm is described as below:

1. Take CBM as the initial BM ϕ, where ϕi = mod (i, m), i = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1. Calculate d associated with ϕ. Let ϕ∗ = ϕ and d∗ = d, where ϕ∗ represents the current optimal BM and d∗ represents its associated distance.
2. For iteration t = 0 to T − 1, do Steps 3-6. 3. Choose a paired VNs (vi , v j ) randomly, swap ϕi and ϕ j .
Repeat this process l times.
4. For each VN vi , i = 0 to N − 1, do Step 5. 5. Find the optimal paired-VN of vi : For j = 0, 1, . . . , N −
1, let d j = Nc. Then visit vi ’s paired v j one by one. At each time, calculate the associated distance d j if ϕi and ϕ j are swapped. The optimal paired-VN, denoted by vk, is chosen to have the minimum associated distance. That
is dk = min{d0, d1, . . . , dN−1}. Then swap ϕi and ϕk . 6. Calculate d associated with ϕ. If d < d∗, let d∗ = d,
ϕ∗ = ϕ. Otherwise, ϕ = ϕ∗. If d == 0, stop the
algorithm. 7. Output ϕ∗ as the optimized practical BM.

Step 3 is used to prevent the algorithm from getting trapped.

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS

In this section, we evaluate the decoding thresholds and

BER performances of our proposed BMs and compare them

to that of [8] and CBM. In the simulations, three length-10752

regular LDPC codes constructed from Euclidean geometry

(2, 27) by using the method in [14] are used. The code rates

are

1 4

,

1 2

and

2 3

,

and

the

(dv , dc)

pairs

are

(3, 4),

(3, 6)

and

(3, 9), respectively. The maximum decoder iteration number

is set to 500.

We use our proposed BM design method in Section V to

obtain the optimized BMs for (3, 4), (3, 6) and (3, 9) regular

LDPC coded BICM schemes. In the simulations, we set the

iteration number T = 20000 and the number of randomly

swapped VN pairs l = 50 in the second design phase. We

observed that the decoding threshold can not be improved

much by increasing the iteration number T or changing l.

Table I presents the CN type distribution P of our proposed

BMs and the BMs in [8] for various LDPC coded BICM

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: BIT MAPPING DESIGN FOR LDPC CODED BICM SCHEMES WITH MULTI-EDGE TYPE EXIT CHART

725

TABLE I CN TYPE DISTRIBUTION P OF THE PROPOSED BM AND BM IN [8]

TABLE II DECODING THRESHOLDS Eb /N0 (dB) OF DIFFERENT BMs

codes at the BER of 10−5, respectively. In 64-PSK BICM

with

rate-

1 2

LDPC

code,

our

proposed

BM

has

almost

the

same performance. Compared to the trivial CBM strategy, our

proposed BMs have better BER performances in the waterfall

region in all schemes. We can achieve up to 0.43 SNR dB gain at the BER of 10−5. Note that we did not discuss the

effect of the design on error floor and we will discuss this in

our future work.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we considered the practical BM design for regular LDPC coded BICM scheme. We first proposed multiedge type EXIT functions to calculate the decoding threshold for BICM schemes with regular LDPC ensembles. We further proposed a two phase design method to find practical BMs for BICM schemes with given LDPC codes. Simulation results showed that the BER performances of our designed BMs were better than or equal to those of the existing BMs.

Fig. 4. BER simulations in AWGN channels.

schemes. Table II shows the associated decoding thresholds in

dB calculated by our proposed EXIT functions. Compared to

BMs generated by [8], our proposed BMs have better decoding

thresholds

and

rate-

2 3

with rate-

in

256-QAM

BICM

schemes

with

rate-

1 4

,

rate-

1 2

LDPC codes. For 64-PSK modulated BICM scheme

1 2

code,

our

proposed

BM

has

almost

the

same

decoding threshold. Compared to CBM strategy, our proposed

BMs have better decoding thresholds in all schemes.

Figs. 4 (a) and (b) show the BER performance of various

BMs for regular LDPC coded BICM schemes as specified in

Table I. The simulation results are consistent with the decoding

threshold analysis. Compared to the BMs designed by [8], our

proposed BMs have 0.15 dB, 0.1 dB and 0.27 dB gain in 256-

QAM

BICM

schemes

with

rate-

1 4

,

rate-

1 2

and

rate-

2 3

LDPC

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Li and W. E. Ryan, “Bit-reliability mapping in LDPC-coded modulation systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–3, Jan. 2005.
[2] F. Steiner, G. Böcherer, and G. Liva, “Protograph-based LDPC code design for shaped bit-metric decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 397–407, Feb. 2016.
[3] L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-edge-type low-density parity-check codes for bandwidth-efficient modulation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 43–52, Jan. 2013.
[4] T. Cheng, K. Peng, J. Song, and K. Yan, “EXIT-aided bit mapping design for LDPC coded modulation with APSK constellations,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 777–780, Jun. 2012.
[5] G. Richter, A. Hof, and M. Bossert, “On the mapping of low-density parity-check codes for bit-interleaved coded modulation,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 2146–2150.
[6] J. Du, L. Zhou, and X. He, “The joint demodulation and decoding for BICM-ID system with BEC approximation and optimized bit mapping,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[7] J. Lei, W. Gao, P. Spasojevic, and R. Yates, “Demultiplexer design for multi-edge type LDPC coded modulation,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2009, pp. 933–937.
[8] R. D. Maddock and A. H. Banihashemi, “Reliability-based coded modulation with low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 403–406, Mar. 2006.
[9] J. Du, J. Yuan, L. Zhou, and X. He, “A progressive edge growth algorithm for bit mapping design of LDPC coded BICM schemes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2016, pp. 2129–2133.
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” in Proc. Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece 60th Birthday, 2002.
[11] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, May 1998.
[12] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of lowdensity parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[13] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optim., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 341–359, 1997.
[14] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: Geometry decomposition and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

