A Deep Learning-Aided Post-Processing Scheme to Lower the Error Floor of LDPC 
Codes 
 
Jiajun He 
School of Electronic and Information Engineering 
South China University of Technology 
Guangzhou, China 
e-mail: ee201820109636@mail.scut.edu.cn 
 
 
Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are widely 
used in a variety of communication systems because of their 
low 
complexity 
iterative 
decoding 
and 
performance 
approaching Shannon capacity. However, the existence of 
error floor seriously hinders the application and development 
of LDPC codes in related fields. In this paper, a deep 
learning-aided post-processing scheme (DLAPPS) based on 
Layered Normalized Min-Sum algorithm (LNMSA) is 
proposed to effectively lower error floor of LDPC codes. 
LNMSA is used in the first stage, and in the second stage 
incorrect frames are re-decoded by processing two types of 
nodes classified by neural networks.  Simulation results show 
that the proposed DLAPPS can significantly improve error 
correction performance and lower the error floor of LDPC 
codes while maintaining a relatively low decoding complexity. 
Keywords-LDPC 
codes; 
error 
floor; 
deep 
learning; 
post-processing; layered normalized min-sum 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, widely used in 
communication fields [1] [2], have been proven to achieve a 
performance close to the Shannon capacity for a variety of 
channels. Min-Sum algorithm (MSA) is an approximate 
simplification of Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm, which 
can 
greatly 
reduce 
the 
complexity 
of 
hardware 
implementation, so it has been widely used.  
Error floor, characterized by a sudden decrease in the 
slope of the bit error ratio (BER) performance curve from the 
middle signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) to the high SNR, can 
easily be observed in the simulation results of LDPC codes 
in the Min-Sum decoding. Many applications, such as deep 
space communication, wired network transmission and data 
storage [3], [4], require a very low BER (below 10-12~10-15) 
and frame error rate (FER) [5]. Therefore, how to effectively 
lower the error floor of LDPC codes is one of the key 
problems in its practical applications. 
It has been proved that the appearance of error floor is 
mainly caused by small trapping sets [6] at high SNR region. 
In order to solve the trapping sets problem, many experts and 
scholars have continuously improved the BP decoding 
algorithm, including averaged iterative decoding algorithm 
[7] and two-stage decoding algorithm [8] [9]. The averaged 
iterative decoding algorithm weakens the variation of the 
confidence of the variable nodes in the iterative process, 
which prevents the variable nodes in the trapping set from 
rapidly converging to error bits. The conventional BP 
decoding is often adopted in the first stage of the two-stage 
decoding algorithm, and in the second stage the trapping set 
is broken by flipping the error variable nodes in the 
suspected trapping set to achieve the purpose of lowering the 
error floor. Some typical two-stage decoding schemes 
include backtracking [8] and post-processing decoding 
scheme [9]. 
In this paper, a deep learning-aided post-processing 
scheme (DLAPPS) is proposed to break the trapping sets 
with no need to understand the structure and number of 
trapping sets. In the first stage, Layered Normalized 
Min-Sum algorithm (LNMSA) is used. In the second stage, 
the data characteristics of each variable node obtained in the 
first stage are used as input, and two types of nodes are 
classified through the deep neural network. While enhancing 
the reliability of the first kind of nodes, the second kind of 
nodes are sorted in ascending order according to the average 
of the log-likelihood ratio LLR (suspicious degree) of the 
previous stage, and then these nodes are flipped in turn. Then 
the error frame is re-decoded until the decoding output is 
correct or all classified wrong nodes are processed. 
Simulation results show that although the complexity of 
proposed method is slightly increased, the proposed method 
can achieve a considerable performance improvement of 
about 1.6 dB compared with LNMSA. 
The rest of this paper is organized as below. Section II 
reviews irregular QC-LDPC codes and LNMSA. In Section 
III, the post-processing method based on deep learning 
proposed in this paper is discussed. Section IV shows the 
simulation results of several irregular LDPC codes. The 
conclusion is given in Section V. 
II. 
PRELIMINARIES 
A. Irregular QC-LDPC Codes 
In 
this 
paper, 
irregular 
binary 
Quasi-Cyclic 
LDPC(QC-LDPC) codes are taken as the research object. 
The QC-LDPC code is an LDPC code with a cyclic structure 
in the sub-matrix. Its basic form is as follows: 
 
          
[
 
 
 
 
     
    
    
 
    - 
    
    
    
 
    - 
    
    
    
 
    - 
 
 
 
 
 
  -   
  -   
  -   
 
  -   - ]
 
 
 
 
 
         (1) 
1587
2020 IEEE 20th International Conference on Communication Technology
978-1-7281-8141-7/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Where C and T are the number of rows and columns of 
the QC-LDPC code check matrix, 𝐼𝑖, 𝑗 is the cyclic submatrix 
of the QC-LDPC code check matrix which has a L×L 
dimension. Then the entire QC-LDPC code check matrix has 
C × L rows and T × L columns, and the code rate is R = (T-C) 
/T. 
The check matrix of the LDPC code can usually be 
represented by a Tanner graph. The Tanner graph has n 
variable nodes and m check nodes, which represent the 
number of columns and rows of the check matrix H, 
respectively. Some check nodes and variable nodes are 
connected to each other, which we call edges, corresponding 
to the "1" elements in the check matrix H. The number of 
connected edges of each check node or variable node is 
called the degree of the node. Take the check matrix of 
(10,2,4) LDPC code as an example for illustration: 
 
   
[
 
 
 
 1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1]
 
 
 
 
         (2) 
 
 
Figure 1.  Tanner graph of (10,2,4) LDPC code. 
Fig. 1 is the Tanner graph corresponding to (10,2,4) 
LDPC code check matrix. The degree of the check node of 
(10,2,4) LDPC code is 4, and the degree of the variable node 
is all 2. This kind of LDPC code with the same degree of all 
check nodes and all variable nodes is called a regular LDPC 
code; Similarly, if the check nodes or variable nodes have 
different degrees, this LDPC code is called an irregular 
LDPC code. 
B. Layered Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm 
The Layered Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm (LNMSA) 
adopted in this paper has the advantage that the update of 
variable nodes and check nodes can be performed at the 
same time without waiting for the other party, thus speeding 
up the decoding processing speed. On the other hand, the 
layered decoding makes full use of the check information of 
each layer in every iteration and speeds up the iterative speed 
by updating the variable node information in time in each 
layer and applying it to the node update in the next layer. 
Let     denotes the variable information passed from 
the     variable node to the     check node; Let     
denotes the check information passed from the     check 
node to the     variable node. Let    denotes the LLR of 
the     variable node. Let    denotes the     posterior 
LLR information. Let  ̂  denotes the     bit output after 
decoding. We define 𝑖 as the current number of iterations, 
𝐼    as the set maximum number of iterations and   as the 
number of iterations. The iterative process of the LNMSA is 
as follows: 
1) initialization: let 𝑖 1   0; for each   and  , 
initialize variable information and check information: 
   
        
                          (3) 
   
    0                           (4) 
2) Iterative decoding: Layer  , iteration 𝑖: 
   
        
           
                    (5) 
 
   
    
   ∏
 𝑖   
         
       
                                         𝑖           |     |           (6) 
          
         
         
                     (7) 
3) Hard decision: 
         ̂   {0   
      0
1   
      0
                    (8) 
Among them,   
      is the output of the last layer. If it is 
not the last layer, we continue the decoding of the   1   
layer of the 𝑖   iteration. If   ̂  0 or 𝑖 𝐼   , the 
decoding process ends, and the decoded code   is output. 
Otherwise, we increase 𝑖 by 1 and decode again. 
III. 
THE PROPOSED SCHEME 
A. Error Floor of QC-LDPC Codes 
It has been proved that the occurrence of error floor is 
mainly caused by small trapping sets at high SNR region. A 
common trapping set is that in the BP iterative decoding 
process, both the number of unsatisfied check nodes and 
error bits present a random pattern, that is, there is no 
obvious regularity, and the error number is large. The 
number of unsatisfied check nodes and error bits do not 
decrease significantly as the number of iterations increases, 
as shown in the Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. This type of error, the 
result of the combined effects of multiple larger trapping sets, 
shows strong chaos, and the number of bit errors caused is 
usually very large. 
In fact, if we can lock some error bits, flip them, and 
re-decode them, the decoder is likely to jump out of the 
trapping set and converge to a correct codeword. But there 
are many types and numbers of trapping sets, involving a 
wide range of nodes. If all the variable nodes in the trapping 
sets are flipped, the complexity is too high to be 
implemented by hardware. Consequently, a bit-flip decoding 
based on deep learning is proposed in this paper to help 
break the trapping set. 
B. Deep Learning-Based Two-Class Classifier 
Deep learning (DL), first proposed by Hinton [10], is a 
method of learning based on data. In recent years, the 
wireless communication method based on deep learning is an 
1588
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
emerging field, and its performance has been comparable to 
the research progress in decades. In dealing with big data 
classification and regression problems, deep learning can 
learn the mapping relationship between input and output 
very well. DL is highly dependent on data. If the training 
samples are large enough, then the learned weights can be 
well used to predict new test samples, that is, they have 
better generalization ability. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Potentially correctable error numbers of BP decoding. 
 
Figure 3.  Potentially uncorrectable error numbers of BP decoding. 
The architecture of proposed deep learning-aided 
post-processing scheme (DLAPPS) is illustrated in Figure 4. 
At the transmitter, the codeword                of 
length 
K 
is 
encoded 
into 
a 
binary 
codeword 
U              of length N through the channel. The 
codeword U is then mapped to the symbol vector S through 
BPSK modulation. The vector S is transmitted on the 
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel where the 
mean value of the noise random variable is 0 and the 
variance is N0/2, and the received codeword vector is 
              .  
The proposed DLAPPS does not lock each variable node 
in the trapping set but evaluates the decoding correctness of 
each variable node of the error frame based on a pre-trained 
neural network. Like the backtracking algorithm, this paper 
does not need to know the structure and number of trapping 
sets. We set the number of iterations of the Layered 
Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm (LNMSA) in the first stage 
to 50. The LLR value is taken once every 2 iterations, and a 
total of 8 sets of iteration LLR values with an interval of 2 
are taken. Then we take the original LLR value and the LLR 
value of the last iteration respectively. Finally, we calculate 
the LLR average value and LLR variance value of the 10 
groups of LLRs. And the 12 features of the 10 groups of 
iterative LLR value, LLR average value and LLR variance 
used as the data features of each bit are input into the deep 
learning-based two-class classifier to classify two types of 
nodes, that is Type I nodes and Type II nodes. Type I nodes 
and Type II nodes denote nodes that decode correctly and 
incorrectly, respectively. 
In fact, the two types of data in the training set are 
obviously unbalanced, that is, the number of correct bit 
samples is much larger than the number of wrong bit 
samples, which results in the network tending to judge the 
samples as correct bits when the training results are used for 
prediction. Therefore, the cross-entropy loss function is 
improved to solve the problem of unbalanced training 
samples, and a parameter is used to describe the importance 
of the sample to loss. For a small number of samples, the 
contribution to loss is strengthened while for many samples 
the contribution to loss was reduced. The corresponding loss 
function formula is: 
      [          ̂      1         1   ̂ ]          
For two-classification problems,   is the true sample 
label 0 or 1, and  ̂ the probability of the current sample 
label being 1. There is only one difference between the 
above formula and the binary cross-entropy loss function, 
that is, the weighting factors    and    are added.    and 
   denote the weight of the loss function when the actual 
label of the current data is 0 or 1, respectively, which needs 
to be calculated according to the data set in advance. 
C. Target Nodes Processing 
After classifying two types of nodes by neural networks, 
we need information enhancement for Type I nodes and 
selective flipping for Type II nodes. To be more specific, 
Type I nodes are sorted in descending order of the absolute 
value of the LLR average value and select the confidence of 
the first   variable nodes to enlarge. In this paper, p is set to 
5. Then Type II nodes are sorted in ascending order of the 
absolute value of the LLR average value. Since the smaller 
the confidence, the more suspicious the node is, we flip the 
node and re-decode according to the suspicious degree. If the 
decoding is unsuccessful, then flip the next one.  Repeat the 
loop process until the decoding is successful or all nodes of 
type II have been processed. The proposed method is 
presented in Algorithm 1, where N is the number of variable 
nodes and A is the set of the average value of the LLR of 
each variable node   and    represent the number of type I 
nodes information enhanced and type II nodes bit flipped, 
and the maximum number of iterations 𝑖   
    after flipping 
is 50. The magnification factor γ is 1.5 in our experiments. 
1589
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Figure 4.  The proposed DLAPPS decoding architecture.
 
Algorithm 1: The Proposed DLAPPS 
Input: 12 data features of each variable node 
              : LLR value from the channel 
Output: x              
1  Initialization: 
2  𝐼̂  [𝐼̂  𝐼̂    𝐼̂ ]: 𝐼̂    
(Classify each variable node) 
3  for   1 to N do 
4     deep learning-based two-class classifier 
5  end for  
6  for Type I node mi, do 
7     𝐼̂               1 2     
8  end for 
9  for Type II node nj, do 
10       for c =1 to v2 do 
11       |A(  )| = min(|A(  )|, |A(  )|,…) and do 
12       𝐼̂(  )      (  ) 
13       Layered Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm 
14       If   ̂           then 
15            End decoding 
16       else 
17            Remove A(nj) from A 
18        Endif 
19        End for 
20 End for 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Simulation Results 
We simulate the rate 3/4 LDPC codes of length 576 bits 
and 1152 bits from the IEEE 802.16e standards. Simulation 
environment of this paper is presented in Table I. In our 
simulations, it is assumed that it is performed under additive 
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, and the maximum 
number of iterations 𝑖     0 is set to ensure enough 
convergence. In order to achieve optimal performance, the 
maximum number of iterations 𝑖   
    in the second stage is 
also set to 50. It is worth noting that the scaling factor α of 
the LNMSA is set to 0.75 since this scaling factor shows 
obvious error floor in high SNR areas and is easy to 
implement by hardware.  
TABLE I.  SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT 
CPU 
Intel(R) Core (TM) i7-8700K CPU 
@ 3.70GHz  
OS 
Windows 10 
Language 
Python 
Compiler 
VS code 
 
For the post-processing based on deep learning, the 
experimental platform is implemented in Pytorch [11]. We 
use Pytorch to train the neural network with learning rate 
10  , the batch size 2048 and the number of training 200. 
Different neural networks, namely Deep Neural Networks 
(DNN), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Long 
Short Term Memory Networks (LSTM) are adopted in this 
paper. Fig. 5 shows the corresponding error correction 
performance. It can be observed that using different neural 
networks for post-processing results in almost no difference 
in performance. Hence, DNN is used for two classification 
processing in this paper. 
 
 
Figure 5.  FER performance of the rate 3/4 (576,432) LDPC codes from 
IEEE 802.16e standard with different neural networks. 
In Fig. 6, the error correction performance of the rate 3/4 
QC-LDPC codes of length 576 bits from IEEE 802.16e 
standard is shown under different conditions. The results 
denote that at FER of 10  , our proposed scheme has a 
better FER performance than LNMSA, which is specifically 
expressed as a gain of about 1.6dB over conventional 
1590
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
algorithm. Similarly, as shown in Fig. 7, the proposed 
method achieves about 1.1dB gain over conventional LNMS 
algorithm at the FER of 10  .The simulation results show 
that using proposed deep learning-aided post-processing 
decoding method, most irregular QC-LDPC codes can obtain 
considerable gains. 
 
 
Figure 6.  FER performance of the rate 3/4 (576,432) LDPC codes from 
IEEE 802.16e standard. 
 
Figure 7.  FER performance of the rate 3/4 (1152,864) LDPC codes from 
IEEE 802.16e standard. 
When the trapping set is very complicated and multiple 
larger trapping sets play a comprehensive role, it is difficult 
to get the correct flipping attempt in the process of bit 
flipping decoding. Therefore, the proposed method is not 
guaranteed to solve every error but can correct part of errors. 
As shown in Fig. 8, the codeword in Fig. 2 has been 
successfully flipped and the codeword can be converged in 
the iteration after flipping. After the 2    iteration of 
decoding, the number of unsatisfied check nodes and the 
number of error bits are reduced to 0. Similarly, if the 
flipping attempt of DLAPPS in Fig. 3 fails, the codeword 
cannot converge in subsequent iterations, which usually 
presents an oscillation mode, as shown in Fig. 9. 
 
Figure 8.  Convergence of the number of errors by DLAPPS. 
 
Figure 9.  Oscillation of the number of decoding errors by DLAPPS. 
According to the results and analysis, the proposed 
DLAPPS partially or completely solves the trapping set 
problem in different codewords, which significantly 
improves the decoding performance and lowers error floor. 
In addition, the gain becomes larger as SNR increases since 
the main reason for the codeword error in the low-to-medium 
SNR region is the insufficient amount of information of the 
received signal rather than the trapping set problem. 
Therefore, for this kind of trapping set, even if the number of 
iterations of traditional decoding is increased, it cannot be 
corrected. Although our deep learning-aided post-processing 
decoding method cannot correct all errors, but once part of 
error codewords are corrected, many errors can be eliminated, 
which make a great contribution for lowering the error floor. 
B. Complexity Analysis 
We define 𝑖   
    as the maximum number of iterations 
for re-decoding after post-processing, and    as the 
maximum number of flipping. Therefore, compared with 
LNMS, the complexity of the decoding algorithm we 
proposed increases 𝑖   
      . It can be observed that the 
complexity is slightly increased, but the decoding gain is 
obviously improved, so it can be considered to be applied in 
practice. 
1591
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In order to lower the error floor of LDPC codes and 
enable them to be used in practical application research, such 
as 
deep-space 
communications 
and 
wired 
network 
transmission, a post-processing scheme based on deep 
learning is proposed in this paper. The proposed method is to 
classify each bit of the error frame through a two-classifier 
based on deep learning, and then perform information 
enhancement and bit flipping on the two types of nodes 
respectively. Simulation results show that although the 
proposed scheme increases the complexity slightly due to the 
increase of flipping times and iterative times, it obviously 
reduces the frame error rate (FER) of LDPC codes and 
effectively lowers the error floor while maintaining low 
complexity, so it can be considered to be used in practice. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Huang, J. Huang and C. Yang, "Construction of quasi-cyclic 
LDPC codes from quadratic congruences," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 
12, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
313-315, 
Apr. 
2008, 
doi: 
10.1109/LCOMM.2008.080065. 
[2] 
D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance 
of low density parity check codes," Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 
457-458, Mar. 1997, doi: 10.1049/el:19970362. 
[3] 
A. Pramanik, G. Patil and L. Borman, "Small length quasi-cyclic 
LDPC code for wireless applications," Proc. Int. Conf. Microelectron., 
Commun. 
Renew. 
Energy, 
2013, 
pp. 
1-5, 
doi: 
10.1109/AICERA-ICMiCR.2013.6575967. 
[4] 
D. J. C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse 
matrices," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, Mar. 
1999, doi: 10.1109/18.748992. 
[5] 
D. Burshtein and G. Miller, "Expander graph arguments for 
message-passing algorithms," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, 
pp. 782-790, Feb. 2001, doi: 10.1109/18.910588. 
[6] 
A. D. Kumar and A. Dukkipati, "A two stage selective averaging 
LDPC 
decoding," 2012 
IEEE 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Information Theory Proceedings, Cambridge, MA, 2012, pp. 
2866-2870, doi: 10.1109/ISIT.2012.6284048. 
[7] 
S. Landner and O. Milenkovic, "Algorithmic and combinatorial 
analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes," 2005 
International Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications 
and Mobile Computing, Maui, HI, 2005, pp. 630-635 vol.1, doi: 
10.1109/WIRLES.2005.1549481. 
[8] 
J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, "An Iterative 
Decoding Algorithm with Backtracking to Lower the Error-Floors of 
LDPC Codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64-73, Jan. 
2011, doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2010.101210.090628. 
[9] 
Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam and M. J. 
Wainwright, "Lowering LDPC Error Floors by Postprocessing," IEEE 
GLOBECOM 2008 - 2008 IEEE Global Telecommunications 
Conference, 
New 
Orleans, 
LO, 
2008, 
pp. 
1-6, 
doi: 
10.1109/GLOCOM.2008.ECP.590.  
[10] G. E. Hinton,and R. R. Salakhutdinov."Reducing the Dimensionality 
of Data with Neural Networks." Science 313.5786(2006):. doi: 
10.1126/science.1127647. 
[11] PyTorch, https://pytorch.org 
 
1592
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
