M4A.249.pdf

Asia Communications and Photonics Conference 2020 © OSA 2020

A QC-LDPC Design Considering the Limited Number of Decoding Iterations for Optical Communications

Wei Zhang1, Jian Zhao1
1School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China Email address: zhaojian@scut.edu.cn
Abstract: We propose a QC-LDPC design by optimizing the degree distribution under a limited number of decoding iterations. Simulations show that it achieves better performance than conventional QC-LDPC for different code rates and iteration numbers. ©2020TheAuthor(s)
1. Introduction Forward error correction (FEC) based on low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is an important technology in communication to guarantee the reliability and to approach the Shannon limit [1]. Quasi-cyclic low-density paritycheck (QC-LDPC) codes, which have advantages of simple implementation of decoding and encoding, fast convergence in iterative decoding and low error floor, have been widely investigated [2]. The degree distribution is an important metric in LDPC and influences its decoding performance. Conventionally, the method of extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart can obtain the decoding threshold for each degree distribution so that we can minimize the decoding threshold to search the optimal degree distribution. This method works well when the number of decoding iterations is very lager but it exhibits performance degradation when the maximum number of iterations is limited. Recently, a method to select the optimal degree distribution under a limited number of iterations was proposed [3]. However, this algorithm cannot be applied to QC-LDPC.
In this paper, we investigate the design of the optimal degree distribution under a limited number of iterations for QC-LDPC. Simulations of a 16QAM optical coherent system show that the QC-LDPC designed by the proposed degree distribution exhibits better performance than that using the degree distribution selected by minimizing the decoding threshold when both have the same sparsity. This performance advantage is also observed under different code rates and using different iteration numbers.
2. Principle and algorithm description The parity check matrix H of QC-LDPC code can be represented by H=[I(pi,j)] where 1iJ, 1jL, -1pi,jp-1. I(pi,j) is a zero matrix with the size of pp if pi,j = -1, otherwise it is a circulant permutation matrix that is obtained by cyclically right shifting pi,j positions for an pp identity matrix. The degree distribution of QC-LDPC includes variable degree distribution and check degree distribution. We use λ(x)= ∑d λdxd , ρ(x)= ∑d ρdxd to denote these two distributions, where d and d are the fractions (edge perspective) of degree-d variable nodes and check nodes, respectively.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. EXIT chart of two irregular QC-LDPC codes with a code rate of 0.8 based on (a) decoding threshold; (b) the required SNR with 8 iterations. The degree distribution of code I is λ(x) = 0.2588x2+0.1058x3+0.04705x4+0.5882x5 and ρ(x) = 1.0x17; The degree distribution of code II is λ(x) = 0.5249x3+0.4705x4 and ρ(x) = 1.0x17.
The design of QC-LDPC with the optimal degree distribution can be divided into two steps. Firstly, we obtain a series of degree distribution of QCLDPC. In the paper, we use the greedy search algorithm introduced in [4] to search all possible degree distributions under a constant check degree distribution for simplicity. The constant check degree distribution also ensures the sparsity of QC-LDPC, which results in a similar decoding complexity in each iteration.
ACP/IPAOuCth2o0ri2z0ed©licOeSnsAed20u2s0e limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

M4A.249.pdf

Asia Communications and Photonics Conference 2020 © OSA 2020

Next, we search the optimal degree distribution. In conventional QC-LDPC, this is achieved by minimizing the decoding threshold, which can be obtained by the EXIT chart. The EXIT chart is based on the transition of mutual information (MI) between the variable node decoder (VND) and check node decoder (CND) of QC-LDPC. It examines whether MI reaches the value of 1 and the decoding threshold is the minimal required SNR of error-free decoding under a certain degree distribution. The optimal degree distribution is the distribution that results in the minimal decoding threshold. Fig. 1(a) depicts the EXIT chart of two irregular QC-LDPC codes with a code rate of 0.8 under their decoding threshold. It is evident that the curve of VND is close to that of CND in this case. Note that both degree distributions have the same CND because their check degree distributions are identical. The decoding thresholds of code I and code II are 2.38dB and 2.57dB, respectively. Therefore, code I is better because it has a smaller decoding threshold. However, this decoding threshold is obtained under the condition of an infinite number of decoding iterations. The performance of code I may be affected when the maximum number of decoding iterations is not large in practice.
Instead, we obtain the optimal degree distribution by tracing the decoding trajectory. This takes a limited number of decoding iterations into account. Fig. 1(b) shows the EXIT chart of the two irregular QC-LDPC codes at an SNR of 4.22 dB and 3.42 dB, respectively. Their decoding trajectory after 8 iterations reaches the MI of 1. This means code II can have better performance than code I when the maximum number of decoding iterations is 8. Note that the degree distribution of QC-LDPC code considering a limited number of iterations is different when the maximal decoding iterations changes.
After obtaining the optimal degree distribution, we use a hill-climbing algorithm to construct the parity-check matrix of QC-LDPC with different degree distributions [5]. For fair comparison, the convention and proposed QCLDPCs have the same sparsity and the same girth (set as 8), which is also an important parameter for QC-LDPC.
3. Simulation setup and results Fig. 2(a) shows the simulation setup of an optical coherent system with channel coding. At the transmitter, a bit sequence was sent to the QC-LDPC encoder to insert check bits and then the encoded bits were sequentially mapped to symbols using 16-QAM gray mapping. The generated symbols were up-sampled to two samples per symbol and passed a finite impulse response (FIR) filter to pre-compensate the responses of the drivers and digital-to-analogue converters (DACs) so that the signal after the modulator exhibited a raised-cosine spectral profile with a roll-off factor of 0.1. The signals were used to modulate a dual-polarization (DP) I/Q modulator. The laser linewidth was set as zero. In the transmission link, the optical noise was added to the signal to control the optical-signal-to-noise ratio (OSNR). At the receiver, the out-of-band optical noise was filtered by an optical filter, whose bandwidth varied for investigation. the signal was detected by a coherent receiver and the electronic signals were sampled by analogue-to-digital converters (ADCs). In the digital signal processing (DSP), the signals were filtered by FIR filters and then sent to the QC-LDPC decoder. The symbol rate was 15 GBaud per polarization. The simulated number of symbols satisfied that for each bit error rate (BER) under different OSNRs, the number of errors was larger than 50.

QC-LDPC decoder FIR filters ADCs
Optical Hybrid

QC-LDPC encoder Mapping
Pre-filtering DACs

Balanced PDs LO

Laser

DP I/Q modulator

Set OSNR

Optical filter

Fig. 2. Simulation setup of a 15-GBaud 16QAM optical coherent system

Fig. 3(a) shows BER versus OSNR under different 3-dB bandwidth of the optical filter. The size of the QCLDPC is 12506250 with J = 5, L = 25, p = 250. The maximal number of iterations in the decoding is 8. It can be seen that the BER increases at a smaller bandwidth of 8 GHz due to intersymbol interference and also at a larger bandwidth of 12 GHz due to a wider noise bandwidth. The performance is optimal when the filter bandwidth is 10 GHz. We can also see that the QC-LDPC with the distribution considering the limited number of iterations has better performance than the conventional scheme under any filter bandwidth. In the following simulations, we adopt 10GHz filter bandwidth.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

M4A.249.pdf

Asia Communications and Photonics Conference 2020 © OSA 2020

Fig. 3(b) shows the BER performance for different code rates of the QC-LDPC, where the numbers in the bracket
is the code rate. The maximal number of decoding iterations is 8. The size of the check matrix is 7502250,
10004000, 12506250, 15009000 at the code rate of 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, 5/6, respectively. It is found that the proposed QC-LDPC optimized under 8 iterations achieves 0.2~0.7-dB improvement at a BER of 10−6 compared to the conventional QC-LDPC.
Fig. 3(c) depicts BER under different number of iterations in the QC-LDPC decoding. The maximal number of decoding iterations is shown in the brackets. Note that conventional QC-LDPC is identical under different maximal number of iterations. It is clear that the QC-LDPC designed by the proposed algorithm can achieve better performance in high OSNRs for different number of iterations. Fig. 3(d) shows the word error rate (WER) for different number of iterations. We can draw the similar conclusion as Fig. 3(c) and the proposed algorithm significantly reduce the WER.

(b) (a)

(c)
(d)
Fig. 3. (a)-(c) BER versus OSNR for (a) different bandwidths of the optical filter with the code rate of 4/5; (b) different code rates with 8 iterations; (c) different number of iterations with the code rate of 4/5. (d) Word error rate versus OSNR for different number of iterations with the code rate of 4/5. In the figure, “Con. Opt.” and “n-iter Opt.” represent the conventional QC-LDPC and the proposed QC-LDPC optimized under n iterations. In (b)-(d), the bandwidth of the optical filter is 10 GHz.
4. Conclusions In this paper, we have proposed an algorithm to select the degree distribution for QC-LDPC by considering the limited number of iterations in practical implementation. Compared with conventional optimal degree distribution under the same sparsity, the proposed QC-LDPC achieves better performance for different code rate, number of iterations and system bandwidth. The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61971199), Guangdong Science and Technology Planning Project (2019A050503003), Guangzhou Science and Technology Planning Project (201904010298), and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (D2193110). 5. References
[1] S.-Y. Chung et al., “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001. [2] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004. [3] T. Koike-Akino et al., “Iteration-aware LDPC code design for low-power optical communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 573-581, Jan. 2016. [4] L. Wang et al., “Design of irregular QC-LDPC code based multi-level coded modulation scheme for high speed optical communication systems,” China Communications, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 106-120, May 2019. [5] Y. Wang et al., “Construction of high-girth QC-LDPC codes,” in the 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Top., Lausanne, Switzerland, pp. 180-185, Sep. 2008.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:26:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

