ISITA2020, Kapolei, Hawai'i, USA, October 24-27, 2020

Decoding LDPC Codes with Probabilistic Local Maximum Likelihood Bit Flipping

Rejoy Roy Mathews Graduate Research Assistant, LEFT Lab
Utah State University Logan, UT, USA
rejoy.mathews@aggiemail.usu.edu

Chris Winstead Director, LEFT Lab Utah State University
Logan, UT, USA chris.winstead@usu.edu

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are highperformance linear error correcting codes with application to communication channels and digital storage media. LDPC codes are decoded using graph algorithms wherein a channel message sample is decoded with the aid of information from its adjacent graph neighborhood, called the syndrome. This work studies the conditional probability of a channel error given syndrome information at a particular decoding iteration to formulate a new algorithm called Probabilistic Local Maximum Likelihood Bit Flipping (PLMLBF). The PLMLBF algorithm uses a three dimensional Multi-iteration Probability Flip Matrix (MIPFM) to quantify the frequency of errors in a noise corrupted message frame being decoded using a specific LDPC code. The matrix is used to probabilistically decode noise corrupted message frames. The motivation for this work is to provide a theoretical framework for constructing probabilistic and noisy bit-flipping algorithms, such as the Noisy Gradient Descent Bit Flipping (NGDBF) algorithm, which up to now have been mainly heuristic in nature.

rithms have relied on heuristics for performance improvement and presently lack a theoretical framework. The motivation behind this work is to establish an algorithm that has a solid theoretical framework and is backed by informative statistics whilst using the same decoding mechanism as the GDBF and NGDBF algorithms.
With the GDBF objective function as a starting point, this research work studies the conditional probability of channel message sample error given the syndrome information to formulate an error statistics matrix which is termed as the Multi-iteration Probability Flip Matrix (MIPFM). The MIPFM is used to probabilistically flip channel message sample hypothesis till codeword convergence is established or a maximum number of decoding iterations have elapsed. This decoding technique is termed as the Probabilistic Local Maximum Likelihood Bit Flipping (PLMLBF) algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION
The belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithm and the approximate min-sum (MS) decoding algorithm offer the best performance over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. However, these algorithms are complex to be realized on hardware because of the large number of arithmetic operations that need to be repeated over multiple iterations. Many variants of the Bit-Flipping (BF) decoding technique proposed by Gallager [1] are presently used as low complexity decoding algorithms for LDPC codes. Gradient Descent Bit Flipping (GDBF) [2] proposed by Wadayama et al. and Noisy Gradient Descent Bit Flipping (NGDBF) [3] proposed by Sundararajan et al. make use of the channel message sample information and the information available from the parity check matrix about the correctness of a channel message samples decoded value to formulate an objective function which is subject to gradient descent optimization. NGDBF adds a random perturbation to the objective function in GDBF to escape the local maxima the GDBF algorithm has a tendency of getting stuck in to improve convergence onto a codeword.
These algorithm’s keep flipping the channel message samples initial hypothesis based on the objective function, till the decoder converges on a codeword or till the maximum number of decoding iterations has been reached. These algo-

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Notation
Let c be the n bit binary codeword in the linear block code C˜, to be transmitted over the AWGN channel. The linear block code C˜ is defined as C˜ c ∈ F2n where F2n is the binary Galois field. H is defined as the m × n sparse parity check matrix for a specific LDPC code such that Hc = 0.
Before transmission, the binary codeword c is converted into a bipolar codeword cˆ ∈ {−1, +1}n, defined by cˆ (1 − 2c1), (1 − 2c2), ...., (1 − 2cn) : ci ∈ c. The AWGN for the communication channel can be denoted as an n bit vector zˆ ∈ Rn such that each zi ∈ zˆ is an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) Gaussian variable. For an all ‘+1’ bipolar codeword cˆ = {+1}n, transmitted over a noisy channel each channel message sample in the channel message frame yˆ ∈ Rn, defined by yˆ = cˆ + zˆ can be represented as a Gaussian distribution with mean ‘+1’ and standard deviation σ.
Uniform quantization is applied to each channel message sample within the channel message frame to obtain qˆ. Each channel message sample hypothesis xi, in the hypothesis vector xˆ ∈ {−1, +1}n is initialized as the sign of the received quantized channel message sample qi ∈ qˆ. The hypothesis is flipped probabilistically in each iteration of decoding. The
product of the quantized channel message frame and the hypothesis vector is denoted as xˆq such that xqi = xi × qi.

Copyright (C) 2020 by IEICE

205

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISITA2020, Kapolei, Hawai'i, USA, October 24-27, 2020

Based on the H matrix, the parity check neighborhood for all the rows i ∈ {1, 2, ..., n}, also termed as the check nodes is defined as N (i) {j : hij = 1}. Based on the H matrix, the symbol node neighborhood for all the columns j ∈ {1, 2, ..., m}, also termed as the symbol or variable nodes is defined as M(j) {i : hij = 1}.

B. GDBF and NGDBF
In the objective function proposed in the multi-bit Gradient Descent Bit Flipping (M-GDBF) algorithm, all the codeword symbols having Ek less than the flipping threshold θ are considered for flipping.

Ek = xkyk +

si

(1)

i∈M(k)

where si = j∈N (i) xj . Sundararajan et al. added perturbation noise ak, which is
a Gaussian distributed random variable with zero mean and variance σn2 = η2σ2 to the GDBF decoding problem. They also added a weighing parameter w to the syndrome infor-
mation to modify the energy function Ek for flipping bits in the hypothesis vector xˆ as defined in (2). The AWGN channel
noise scale parameter (η) is determined by an empirical search.

Ek = xkyk + w

si + ak

(2)

i∈M (k)

NGDBF uses a local heuristic called threshold adaptation where θ is tuned in every iteration such that θk(t+1) = θk(t)λ. The adaptation parameter is denoted as λ and t indicates a certain iteration of decoding. A value of λ = 1 indicates that no threshold adaptation is present.

III. MULTI ITERATION PROBABILISTIC FLIPPING MATRIX CONSTRUCTION AND PLMLBF DECODING
A. MIPFM Construction Steps
The Multi-iteration Probability Flip Matrix (MIPFM) is a three dimensional matrix that is used as a flipping probability lookup table for a specific channel message sample yi with computed syndrome pi that is being decoded in iteration . A Probability Flip Matrix (PFM) refers to the two dimensional matrix that is used as a flipping probability lookup table in a specific iteration of decoding. The three indices into the MIPFM are xi × qi (xqi), pi and where qi is the channel message sample yi after uniform quantization is applied. The product of xi and qi is considered instead of qi to index into the matrix, to avoid a bias to any specific codeword. This is in line with the objective function for the GDBF and NGDBF algorithms. The set of all possible values for quantized channel message sample is denoted by ζ and the set of possible values for the syndrome is denoted by φ.
In this research work, the total frame count (F ) used to establish informative error statistics free from small sample size anomalies is 200,000 channel message frames. Negligible impact on the PFM probability values is observed beyond 200,000 channel message frames.

Once the MIPFM is constructed, it can be used as the probability lookup table for the PLMLBF algorithm. In each iteration of PLMLBF decoding, channel message samples qi, with computed syndrome pi can be probabilistically decoded over multiple iterations by indexing into the MIPFM using (xq, p, ). Below are the steps that are followed in this work for the MIPFM construction and application in the PLMLBF decoding algorithm.

Step 1: F frames of an all +1 n-symbol bipolar codeword is transmitted over a noisy communication channel. The 1/2PEGReg504x1008 LDPC code is used for simulation within the scope of this work. For the 1/2PEGReg504x1008 LDPC code, a bipolar codeword is made up of 1008 code symbols. Each codeword frame is denoted by cˆo where o ∈ {1, ..., F } and each code symbol in a specific codeword frame cˆo can be addressed as cˆo(i). Step 2: To mimic the transmission over a noisy channel with a specific SNR value, noise vector zˆo is superimposed on cˆo for all o ∈ {1, ..., F }. Noise samples zˆo(i) are samples from a normal distribution with a standard deviation of σ. The noise added codeword frames are the channel message frames and are denoted as yˆo where yˆo = cˆo + zˆo for all o ∈ {1, ..., F }. Each yˆo(i) is clipped at Ymax such that −Ymax ≤ yˆo(i) ≤ Ymax. Step 3: Uniform quantization is applied to each channel message sample in yˆo for all o ∈ {1, ..., F } to obtain qˆo. For Q quantization bits, the total number of quantization levels NQ is equal to 2Q. The quantization function Q(y) is denoted as:

Q(y) = sign(y)

|y|NQ

1 +

2Ymax

(3)

2Ymax

2

NQ

Step 4: Define ζ as the set of all possible values for qˆo(i) such that row r in the PFM has ζ(r) as its xq indexing value. The possible values of qˆo(i) and xˆqo(i) are the same because xˆo(i) is a hypothesis and has values ∈ {+1, −1}. Step 5: Define φ as the set of possible values for the syndrome such that column s in the PFM has φ(s) as
its syndrome indexing value. Step 6: An initial bipolar hypothesis vector xˆo is computed based on the sign of the channel message samples in the vector qˆo for all o ∈ {1, ..., F } . Step 7: The value of the decoding iteration index is
initialized to 0. Step 8: The product of xˆo(i) and qˆo(i) is computed for all the individual channel message samples i ∈ {1, ..., n} for each channel frame o ∈ {1, ..., F }. Step 9: Check node value sˆo(j) is computed for all the check nodes j ∈ {1, ..., m} for each channel frame o ∈ {1, ..., F } where sˆo(j) = i∈N (j) xˆo(i). Step 10: Syndrome component pˆo(i) is computed for all the variable nodes i ∈ {1, ..., n} for each channel frame o ∈ {1, ..., F } where pˆo(i) = j∈M(i) sˆo(j). Step 11: Create two dimensional matrices H and E of size ζ × φ and initialize all the elements of the respective

Copyright (C) 2020 by IEICE

206

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISITA2020, Kapolei, Hawai'i, USA, October 24-27, 2020

matrix to 0. Step 12: For each r ∈ {1, ....ζ} and each s ∈ {1, ....φ}, H (r, s) is the count of the total channel message samples in all the F channel message frames having an xq value equal to ζ(r) and syndrome equal to φ(s). Step 13: For each r ∈ {1, ....ζ} and each s ∈ {1, ....φ}, E (r, s) is the count of the total channel message samples in all the F channel message frames having an xq value equal to ζ(r), syndrome equal to φ(s) and a hypothesis equal to -1. Step 14: For each r ∈ {1, ....ζ} and each s ∈ {1, ....φ}, P (r, s) is equal to E (r, s) divided by H (r, s). This matrix is termed as the PFM for iteration . Step 15: The hypothesis xˆo(i) for each channel message sample in each individual frame is flipped with a probability equal to P (xˆqo(i), po(i)). Step 16: is incremented by 1 and all the sequence of steps starting from Step 8 are repeated till = T − 1
B. MIPFM Construction - Algorithmic Representation

Algorithm 1 MIPFM Construction

Parameter Definitions for MIPFM construction

1: for o ∈ {1, ..., F } do

2: cˆo(i) ← +1 ∀ i 3: yˆo ← cˆo + zˆo 4: qˆo ← Q(yˆo) 5: xˆo ← sign(qˆo)

6: Initialize ← 0 7: while < T do

MIPFM Construction Steps

8: for o ∈ {1, ..., F } do

9:

xˆqo(i) ← xˆo(i) × qˆo(i) ∀ i

10:

sˆo(j) ← i∈N (j) xˆo(i)

∀j

11:

pˆo(i) ← j∈M(i) sˆo(j)

∀i

12: H (r, s) ← 0 ∀ r ∀ s

13: E (r, s) ← 0 ∀ r ∀ s

14: for o ∈ {1, ..., F } do

15:

H (xˆqo(i), pˆo(i))++ ∀ i

16:

if xˆo(i) == −1 then E (xˆqo(i), pˆo(i))++ ∀ i

17: P (r, s) ← E (r, s) / H (r, s) ∀ r ∀ s MIPFM Application (Decoding) Steps

18: for o ∈ {1, ..., F } do

19:

Flip xˆo(i) with Prob(P (xˆqo(i), pˆo(i))) ∀ i

20:

← +1

C. PLMLBF Decoding Approach
The previous section defines a specific methodology that was explored for populating the error probabilities in the MIPFM. Another technique that was used for populating the MIPFM error probabilities is presented in one of the later sections. The intended outcome of this work is to define a BF decoding approach that is based on an error probability matrix (MIPFM) with the proposed techniques to populate

error probabilities being the gateway to develop more robust methods of populating the MIPFM. The general approach to PLMLBF decoding is presented below. A PFM for a specific decoding iteration is denoted by P. The function for generating the PFM for the (l + 1)th iteration is denoted as F, SNR is representative of a channel message frame communicated over a channel with a specific SNR and D represents the PLMLBF decoding function.

Algorithm 2 PLMLBF Decoding Approach

MIPFM Construction

1: for l ∈ {0, ..., T − 2} do

2:

P(l+1) = F (P(0,..,l), SNR, H)

PLMLBF Decoding 3: D(P(0,..,T −1), SNR, H)

IV. BEHAVIOR OF PLMLBF ALGORITHM
An MIPFM is constructed prior to the start of PLMLBF decoding. The MIPFM can then be used as a probability lookup table for PLMLBF decoding. The simulation results are obtained after decoding 2000 channel message frames. The 200,000 channel message frames that are used to construct the MIPFM are independent of the 2000 channel message frames used to obtain the simulation results. Unless otherwise stated, the MIPFM used for decoding is constructed using the exact parameter values as the 2000 channel message frames that are being decoded to obtain the simulation results. These parameters include Ymax, T, Q, SNR and the LDPC code used for decoding. The channel message sample saturation value is denoted as Ymax and Q is the bits of quantization applied on the channel message samples. A BER performance plot indicating PLMLBF decoding performance over 4 different SNR values would have 4 respective MIPFM’s constructed for each of those SNR values.
All the LDPC code constructions used for simulation are from MacKay’s encyclopedia [4]. Unless otherwise stated, the following values are considered for each of the parameters that are crucial to the decoding process. The channel message sample values are saturated at 2.5, quantized using 8-bit quantization and decoded over 100 iterations (Ymax = 2.5, Q = 8 and T = 100). The total number of frames decoded simultaneously are 2000, and the decoding is stopped when a total of 100 frame errors are detected.
A. BER Performance
BER performance curves, usually have an initial waterfall region which exhibits an improvement in BER performance with an increase in SNR followed by an error floor region, where there is very little improvement in BER performance with an increase in SNR. Instead of having the standard waterfall region, from Fig. 1 it can be observed that the PLMBF algorithm performance curve is almost straight up to an SNR of 3.25 dB, after which it exhibits the standard waterfall region.

Copyright (C) 2020 by IEICE

207

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISITA2020, Kapolei, Hawai'i, USA, October 24-27, 2020

Bit Error Rate

10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5 10−6 10−7
2

* PLMLBF M-GDBF M-NGDBF λ = 1 M-NGDBF λ < 1 MS T = 5 MS T = 10 MS T = 100 BP T = 250

3

4

5

6

SNR Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 1. Bit Error Rate versus Eb/N0 performance curve for the PLMLBF algorithm with T = 100, Q = 8 using the rate 1/2 PEGReg504x1008 LDPC code simulated over an AWGN channel with binary antipodal modulation. Performance curves for several other algorithms are provided for comparison.

The error at lower SNR’s are too high for the error statistics to be informative. On account when the initial PFM in the MIPFM is used for the decoding stage of MIPFM construction, a lot of non-erroneous channel message samples are flipped erroneously leading to high error flipping probabilities. As the iterations proceed, the matrix construction does not recover from these initial erroneous flips and continues erroneous flipping in the later iterations of MIPFM construction. This on account leads to poor BER performance when these MIPFM’s are used for simulations.
From an SNR of 3.25 dB to an SNR of 4 dB, the performance curve for the PLMLBF algorithm exhibits the waterfall behavior. The PLMLBF algorithm provides performance gains over the M-NGDBF algorithm (when implemented without heuristics) at SNR values of 3.75 dB and SNR values of 4 dB and is found to be most effective when working with communication channels exhibiting an SNR close to 4 dB.
After an SNR of 4 dB, trapping sets [5] have a significant impact on the decoding performance. Trapping sets do not allow convergence to a code word, which effects the decoding performance. The constructed MIPFM is developed empirically and on account does not have any additional heuristic to deal with the trapping sets. The performance curve enters into the error floor region after an SNR of 4 dB on account of trapping sets. NGDBF adds the perturbation noise to escape trapping sets and on account exhibits better decoding performance for SNR’s over 4 dB.
B. PLMLBF with NGDBF inversion function
This research work proposes decoding assisted by an explicit probability lookup table construction. This section explores the impact of populating the probabilities in the MIPFM based on the inversion function defined in the NGDBF algorithm. For a certain quantized channel message sample qk

with a specific syndrome, NGDBF defines the probability of flipping the hypothesis xk as PF (xk) = P r(E¯k + ak < θ). The value of E¯k is fixed for a certain quantized channel message sample with a specific syndrome and is defined by xkqk + w i∈M(k) si. The Gaussian perturbation noise ak results in the probabilistic flipping value PF (xk).
In the first iteration (initial PFM) of MIPFM construction,
the probabilities are populated based on the NGDBF flipping
probabilities. In each subsequent iteration of the MIPFM
construction, the probabilities within each bin of a PFM is
tuned empirically based on a biasing function. For a specific probability PF (x) within a certain bin, the biasing function is defined in (4).

PF (xh+1)

=

Nh Nh +

1 PF (xh) +

eh+1 Nh + 1

(4)

In each iteration of MIPFM construction as h new samples are obtained for a specific bin within the PFM, the probability in the bin is tuned every time a new sample is obtained for that bin. The biased sample count Nh is the sum of the sample count h and a biasing value B. The value of B was computed empirically and found to be 10. For a specific bin, the hypothesis xh+1 of the (h+1)th sample being erroneous is defined as eh+1 with e ∈ {0, 1} and 1 indicating an erroneous sample.
For each SNR, the below table specifies the value of θ and η in the NGDBF inversion function used to construct the initial iteration of the MIPFM. These values were calculated through an empirical search. The value of w was set as 0.75.

TABLE I NGDBF θ AND η VALUES FOR MIPFM CONSTRUCTION AT EACH SNR

SNR

θ

η

2

-0.3

0.8

2.25

-0.3

0.85

2.5

-0.4

0.95

2.75

-0.4

1

3

-0.35

1

3.25

-0.3

0.9

3.5

-0.2

0.9

3.75

-0.3

0.9

4

-0.3

0.9

4.25

-0.45

1

4.5

-0.2

0.75

The MIPFM constructed based on the NGDBF inversion function is used in PLMLBF decoding. From Fig. 2 it is evident that beyond an SNR of 4 dB, the PLMLBF clearly outperforms the M-NGDBF algorithm (when used without local heuristics) and comes in close proximity to the MNGDBF algorithm when used with the threshold adaptation local heuristic. Up to an SNR of 3.75 dB, the PLMLBF algorithm when used with a biased NGDBF based MIPFM construction performs sub-optimally. Avoiding the biasing function and using the first iteration of the MIPFM for all iterations of PLMLBF decoding will effectively solve the sub-optimality at lower SNR’s. At lower SNR’s, using this

Copyright (C) 2020 by IEICE

208

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISITA2020, Kapolei, Hawai'i, USA, October 24-27, 2020

technique will enable PLMLBF to match the NGDBF performance curve when implemented without any local threshold adaptation heuristic.

Bit Error Rate

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5 10−6 10−7

* PLMLBF - NGDBF construction * PLMLBF - Original construction
M-NGDBF λ = 1 M-NGDBF λ < 1

2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5

SNR Eb/N0 (dB)

[2] Wadayama, Tadashi, et al. ”Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes” 2008 International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications. IEEE, 2008.
[3] Sundararajan, Gopalakrishnan, Chris Winstead, and Emmanuel Boutillon. ”Noisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes” IEEE Transactions on Communications 62.10, 2014: 3385-3400.
[4] MacKay, David JC. ”Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes”, accessed June 2019 http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[5] Richardson, Tom. ”Error floors of LDPC codes.” Proceedings of the annual Allerton conference on communication control and computing. Vol. 41. No. 3. The University; 1998, 2003.

Fig. 2. Bit Error Rate versus Eb/N0 performance curve for the PLMLBF algorithm with T = 100, Q = 8 and the NGDBF inversion function used as the starting point for MIPFM construction using the rate 1/2 PEGReg504x1008 LDPC code simulated over an AWGN channel with binary antipodal modulation. Performance curves for M-NGDBF is provided for reference.

V. CONCLUSION
This work proposes a novel BF algorithm with an explicit construction that builds on an error probability matrix based approach to BF decoding. The developed PLMLBF algorithm out-performs the M-NGDBF algorithm (without local threshold adaptation) at higher SNR’s when simulated with the 1/2PEGReg504x1008 LDPC code and comes within 0.25 dB of the M-NGDBF algorithm (with local threshold adaptation).
Empirical algorithms like NGDBF have LDPC code dependencies and rely on heuristical changes for performance improvements. Constructing an MIPFM generalizes the idea of populating discreet information in a probability matrix structure to assist the BF decoder to make flipping decisions in a more statistically robust fashion. Two different techniques are presented in this work to determine the error probabilities within the MIPFM. The two proposed approaches could be the potential gateway to develop probability matrix constructions with more robust error probabilities.
PLMLBF uses a global lookup table for decoding. This approach can significantly reduce hardware implementation complexity when compared to the NGDBF decoding algorithm which uses hardware for each codeword symbol being decoded. The proposed work pushes for a more global adaptation based BF decoding approach as opposed to the local adaptation approach that is presented in some of the referenced work.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” in Research Monograph Series. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

Copyright (C) 2020 by IEICE

209

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

