2164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

Improving Resistive RAM Hard and Soft Decision Correctable BERs by Using Improved-LLR and Reset-Check-Reverse-Flag Concatenating LDPC Code
Sheyang Ning , Member, IEEE

Abstract—In prior researches, low-density-parity-check (LDPC) code is applied on high-speed magnetic randomaccess-memory (MRAM) for a better correctable bit error rate (CBER). However, on another emerging memory, resistive random-access-memory (RRAM), reset hard breakdown errors have high-reliability log-likelihood ratio (LLR) which significantly degrades LDPC code soft decision CBER and decoding iterations. To solve this issue, two schemes, improved-LLR and reset-check-reverse-flag (RCRF) concatenating systematic LDPC code (RCRF + LDPC), are proposed. The first scheme increases soft decision CBER by using asymmetric LLRs for matching the distribution of reset hard breakdown errors. In addition, RCRF corrects at least one reset error per array subsection. So, both hard and soft decision CBERs are improved. The best performance is obtained by combining these proposals. The hard decision CBER is increased by more than 50% on a wide range of LDPC code options. Moreover, soft decision CBER is improved by 69% and 51%, respectively, on a 1KB codeword, 0.91 code rate quasi-cyclic-LDPC (QC-LDPC) code, and a 2KB codeword, 0.89 code rate Mackey’s code.
Index Terms—Error correction code, low-density-parity-check, RCRF, resistive RAM, concatenated coding.
I. INTRODUCTION
O N NONVOLATILE memories, cost reduction, mostly driven by memory cell scaling, is the key to business success. However, the scaling often increases memory bit error rate (BER) which requires applying a more powerful error correction code (ECC). For example, on NAND flash, the conventionally used Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) code has been replaced by low-density-parity-check (LDPC) code in recent years for higher correctable BER (CBER) [1]. A similar discussion can also be found on emerging non-volatile memories such as using BCH code on phase change randomaccess-memory (PRAM) [2] and LDPC code on magnetic RAM (MRAM) [3]. On emerging memories, strong ECC is needed due to a large amount of post-cycling errors. In addition, though MRAM has several magnitudes faster program
Manuscript received November 10, 2019; accepted December 15, 2019. Date of publication December 17, 2019; date of current version October 5, 2020. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor F. C. M. Lau.
The author is with the Department of Design, Nantero Inc., Sunnyvale, CA 94085 USA (e-mail: sning@nantero.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2019.2960484

and read than NAND flash, LDPC code is still a good choice due to higher CBER, similar decoding latencies, and similar read throughputs compared with BCH code [4]–[6]. Moreover, emerging memories can achieve 50 ns to 100 ns read latency whereas NAND flash needs about 30 us for a single level sensing [7]–[10]. So, the most time-consuming operation in NAND flash soft decision, soft information sensing, is not a limitation for emerging memories.
In this brief, the LDPC code is applied to another emerging memory, resistive RAM (RRAM). Prior researches show that RRAM reset hard breakdown errors can be accumulated after program cycling [7]–[9]. These errors should have the most negative log-likelihood ratio (LLR), the probability of a bit being a reset bit ‘0’ over being a set bit ‘1’, due to their small resistances [7], [9]. Unfortunately, simulation in this brief shows that these high-reliability errors cause significant soft decision CBER degradation because more decoding iterations are needed for correcting a large amount of these errors from the most negative LLR to a positive LLR. One method to solve this issue is to use a stronger LDPC code. As a general method to improve error correction performance, many efforts have been applied to this field. For example, reference [11] generates quasi-cyclic-LDPC (QC-LDPC) code with at least girth 8 by using the greatest-common-divisor (GCD) method. Moreover, reference [12] proposes an automated verification constraint for the GCD. On the other hand, as demonstrated in this brief, RRAM error correction can be improved by coping with its specific cause of performance degradation. In Section III, the proposal improved-LLR increases soft decision CBER by using tuned LLR to match the reset hard errors’ distribution. Moreover, in Section IV, reset-check-reverse-flag (RCRF) is applied to correct the majority of reset hard errors by using flag bits. So, both hard and soft decision CBERs are improved.
In prior researches, RCRF concatenating BCH code (RCRF + BCH) is demonstrated to obtain more than 2 times of CBER than BCH code [4], [13]. Similarly, in this brief, RCRF successfully improves LDPC code performances. To obtain the results, in hard decision CBER calculation, the uncorrectable BER (UBER) achieves 10−15 by convoluting reset error distributions from array subsections after RCRF, and LDPC parity overhead without RCRF [4]. Moreover, soft decision CBER is simulated by using a 1KB codeword, 0.91 code rate quasi-cyclic-LDPC (QC-LDPC) code and a 2KB codeword,

1549-7747 c 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NING: IMPROVING RESISTIVE RAM HARD AND SOFT DECISION CBERs BY USING IMPROVED-LLR AND RCRF CONCATENATING LDPC CODE

2165

0.89 code rate Mackey’s LDPC code [14], respectively. Minsum scheme with the best alpha value is used for simulations. At least girth 6 is guaranteed in these codes.
There are several notifications for solving possible concerns to the following analyses. First, RCRF should be beneficial for any LDPC code, due to its high efficiency reset error correction. Second, LDPC code soft-decision decoding simulations are stopped at the beginning of the waterfall region due to the limitation of simulation time. The error floor of RCRF concatenating LDPC code (RCRF + LDPC) should not be a concern if a proper LDPC code is selected. It is because RCRF only corrects reset errors while the LDPC code parity check matrix (H-matrix) and generator matrix (G-matrix) are not changed. Third, the RCRF + LDPC code does not increase program latency because only one reset program, in the step of reset-all-bits, and one set program are applied. The reset error addresses are obtained at the last verify sensing of reset-all-bits. After that, the RCRF encoding can be processed by logic circuits with negligible delay [4]. Fourth, the errors on flag bits can also be corrected by LDPC code since the flag bits’ data is determined before LDPC code encoding. In this brief, both reset hard errors and retention errors are allocated in random addresses, including flag bits, LDPC parity bits, and user data.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The most common type of RRAM is made by sandwiching a metal oxide, such as HfOx or TaOx, between the top and bottom electrodes. Metal oxide soft breakdown and its recover are used for resistance switching. However, the soft breakdown may turn into a hard breakdown when RRAM cells are wearout. Unfortunately, as explained in the introduction, the reset hard errors significantly degrade LDPC code soft decision performances. In this brief, two new schemes, improved-LLR and RCRF + LDPC code, are proposed to mitigate this issue, and further improve error correction performances.
To the author’s knowledge, the following publications introduced similar ideas compares to the two proposals in this brief. First, The RCRF scheme is previously proposed to concatenate with the BCH code for better CBER [4], [13]. In this brief, RCRF is proposed to concatenate with the LDPC code for improving hard and soft decision CBERs. Second, reference [15] also proposes error mode analysis for LLR optimization. However, the optimization is designed for NAND flash whereas metal oxide breakdown caused reset hard errors is a unique issue on RRAM. A RRAM based optimization should be applied as shown in this brief. Third, in reference [16], the floating-ECC scheme also segments array into different subsections. It moves the ECC parity section, which causes faster cell wear-out, among the subsections for evenly wearing the memory array. However, this idea is different from this brief because ECC CBER is not improved. Finally, flip-and-write (FNW) is proposed for correcting NAND flash process failures [17], [18]. Similar to RCRF, FNW also sectionalizes the array and flips user data so that error bits can carry correct user data. However, FNW stores the error address “in a suitable data structure” [18].

Reference [19] shows that even with 64B small page size, 9 parity bits are needed for storing one error’s address. So, FNW may be practical for correcting the small amount of NAND flash process defects, but it costs a significant area penalty for correcting the accumulated RRAM reset hard errors. In addition, FNW may misrecognize soft reset errors, which can be self-recovered in later program cycles, as hard reset errors since it does not have error address refresh capability. Unfortunately, soft reset error is commonly seen on RRAM due to oxide vacancy trapping and de-trapping [20], [21]. In contrast, RCRF does not need to store error addresses. It uses reset-all-bits to refresh the error addresses per program. In this brief, the soft reset error is not specifically analyzed due to this reason.
III. MOTIVATION AND PROPOSAL IMPROVED-LLR
A. Resistance Distribution Model and Improved-LLR Scheme
Fig. 1 shows an RRAM resistance distribution model based on measured results in [7]–[9]. The values −8, −4, −1, etc. are LLRs in corresponding regions. In this model, reset and set data retention errors are always equal due to symmetric distribution with the same standard deviation. In addition, reset cells also suffer from metal oxide hard breakdown [8]. Measurements show that after 107 program cycles, more than 3-sigma reset hard breakdown errors are accumulated. In practice, depending on data retention time and program cycles, the number of retention errors and reset hard errors may change. For simplification, the number of reset hard errors always equals the sum of the set and reset retention errors in this brief. To solve the issue from reset hard error, improved-LLR is proposed in this figure by using asymmetric LLR X to match reset hard errors’ distribution. Finally, due to the nature of metal oxide soft breakdown, RRAM should have negligible set program errors if sufficient voltage is applied.
LDPC code soft decision will be triggered if the hard decision fails. Fig. 2 compares the simulated average soft decision decoding iterations by using different BERs and LLR schemes. The maximum iterations are limited to 30 in this brief. First, as shown in triangle dots, the conventional LLR scheme is suitable for correcting errors with Gaussian distribution which is normally seen on NAND flash. The number of iterations is around 3 or less which matches the result in reference [22]. However, RRAM reset hard errors have very low resistances which cause an abnormal distribution. Fortunately, the proposal improved-LLR successfully mitigates this issue. Different LLR X values are tried in this figure. The lowest iteration is obtained when the X is −4.
IV. PROPOSAL RCRF CONCATENATING LDPC CODE
RCRF + LDPC code is analyzed in this section which increases both hard decision and soft decision CBERs. Fig. 3 shows the memory array structure. First, the user data cells are evenly segmented into multiple subsections. In each subsection, one additional flag bit is used to correct at least one reset error [4], [13]. In contrast, the conventional LDPC code needs on average about 10 parity bits to correct one error [11], [12].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

Fig. 1. Resistive random-access-memory (RRAM) resistance distribution model.

Fig. 4. Case study and flow chart by using RCRF + LDPC code on (a) program, and (b) read.

Fig. 2. Comparison of soft decision iterations by using a 1KB, 0.91 code rate quasi-cyclic-low-density-parity-check (QC-LDPC) code.
Fig. 3. Array structure by using proposal reset-check-reverse-flag (RCRF) concatenating LDPC code (RCRF + LDPC). One flag bit is used for correcting at least one reset error per subsection.
So, RCRF has higher error correction efficiency than the LDPC code.
Fig. 4 demonstrates a case study and the flow chart by using RCRF + LDPC. In Fig. 4(a), first, RCRF tries to reset all bits to high resistance state ‘0’, including user data bits, flag bits, and LDPC code parity bits. Then, the user data

subsections are sensed to find reset errors with value ‘1’. Next, in step 3, the user data on the reset error addresses is evaluated. If user data is ‘1’, no error correction is needed. On the contrary, the reset error is corrected by reversing all user data in this subsection, as shown in step 4. At least one reset error can be corrected per subsection. In addition, the flag bit is also flipped to record this operation. On step 5, LDPC encoding is applied to add error correction protection on user data, flag bits, and LDPC code parity. A systematic LDPC code is needed. Otherwise, the corrected errors in step 4 may show up again. Finally, on step 6, only one set program is needed due to prior reset-all-bits operation. Furthermore, Fig. 4(b) shows RCRF + LDPC code decoding during read-operation. RCRF has small circuit overhead in the memory controller and negligible encoding and decoding latencies [13].
One possible disadvantage of RCRF is the reset-all-bits operation. At worst case, it may double program power and cell wearing compared with only programming the cell if it does not match the data to be programmed. However, in practice, non-volatile memory has limited data retention time and read disturb cycles. Certain program refresh is needed even when the cell data matches the user data. So, RCRF causes one to two times program power and cell wearing. RCRF feature is better to be turned on after errors are accumulated at end-of-life.
V. IMPROVEMENT OF ERROR CORRECTION PERFORMANCES
In this section, improved-LLR, RCRF, and LDPC code are co-simulated to find improved error correction performances.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NING: IMPROVING RESISTIVE RAM HARD AND SOFT DECISION CBERs BY USING IMPROVED-LLR AND RCRF CONCATENATING LDPC CODE

2167

Fig. 5. Comparison of (a) remaining reset BER and (b) remaining total BER by using RCRF with 64, 128, or 256 bits per subsection.
Fig. 7. Comparison of average LDPC code soft decision decoding iterations by using (a) a 1KB codeword, 0.91 code rate QC-LDPC code, and (b) a 2KB codeword, 0.89 code rate Mackey code.

Fig. 6. (a) Calculation of correctable BER (CBER) by using RCRF + ECC. (b) Improvement of hard decision CBER on different LDPC code strengths.

A. Hard Decision CBER Improvement

Though RCRF can correct one reset error per subsection, in practice, there are always remaining reset errors after RCRF. For example, two reset errors are found in one subsection with user data ‘0’ and ‘1’, respectively. There is always one reset error that remains no matter applying RCRF or not. To understand this impact, Fig. 5(a) shows the average number of remaining reset errors after RCRF. Smaller subsection size corrects more reset errors by reducing the occurrence of the prior example. However, flag-bit overhead is increased (1).

Flag_bit overhead =

LDPC code rate

(1)

LDPC code rate + Subsection size

In the following analyses, 128-bit per subsection is used which corrects the majority of reset hard errors, as shown in Fig. 5(a), and consumes 0.69% array overhead (1). Furthermore, Fig. 5(b) shows the remaining total errors by adding Fig. 5(a)’s results with retention errors. The gray zone demonstrates a 0.45% hard decision CBER by using a 4KB LDPC code [23]. It is clear that the proposal RCRF + LDPC code can help reducing reset errors so that the hard decision can have higher CBER.
Fig. 6 further calculations the exact hard decision CBER improvement when UBER is 10−15. A similar analysis in reference [13] is applied. Specifically, Fig. 6(a) briefly

Fig. 8. Comparison of LDPC code soft decision decoding CBER by using (a) a 1KB codeword, 0.91 code rate QC-LDPC code, and (b) a 2KB codeword, 0.89 code rate Mackey code.
explains how to use the convolution-based method to find RCRF + LDPC code CBER [13]. In step 2, P’(x) equals P’(x + 1) because RCRF can correct at least one reset error per subsection. In step 5, after RCRF, the remained total BER (BER’) is used to calculate the number of errors, ‘y’, that needs to be corrected by LDPC code. If the ‘y’ exceeds LDPC code correctable errors, the raw reset and retention BERs are considered too high for RCRF + LDPC code. So, finally, the steps 1∼5 will be repeated with gradual decreasing of the raw BERs until the ‘y’ errors can be corrected by LDPC code. Furthermore, in Fig. 6(b), a wide range of LDPC code strengths are analyzed for better understanding the CBER improvements on various LDPC codes and code rate options. The results show that the RCRF + LDPC code improves more than 50% of hard decision CBER.
B. Soft Decision CBER Improvement
To obtain soft decision performances, a specific H-matrix is needed for simulation. Figs. 7(a) and 7(b) demonstrate soft decision iterations by using a 1KB codeword, 0.91 code rate quasi-cyclic-LDPC (QC-LDPC) code and a 2KB codeword, 0.89 code rate Mackey’s LDPC code [14], respectively. Girth 4 does not exist in these H-matrices. Results show that both

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

TABLE I COMPARISON OF ECC PERFORMANCES
of the improved-LLR and RCRF + LDPC code can reduce soft decision iterations. The lowest iteration is obtained by combining these two proposals.
In addition, Figs. 8(a) and 8(b) compare soft decision CBERs by using these H-matrices. Similar to reference [24], the criterion of UBER is set at the beginning of the UBER cliff region due to the limitation of simulation time. The LDPC error floor should not be a concern if a proper LDPC code is selected. It is because RCRF just corrects reset errors while the design of LDPC code H-matrix and G-matrix are not affected.
Finally, Table I compares ECC performances by using the conventional LDPC code, FNW + LDPC code, and this brief. Specifically, FNW + LDPC code has similar performances compared to RCRF + LDPC in terms of hard and soft decision CBERs, encoding and decoding latencies, and program latency. Furthermore, by including the improvedLLR, better soft decision CBER can be obtained in this brief. Unfortunately, the FNW scheme needs 13 parity bits to store one error address on 1KB page size. In addition, it may also misrecognize reset soft errors as hard errors. So, the two proposals in this brief should be the most suitable schemes for RRAM.
VI. CONCLUSION RRAM reset hard breakdown caused LDPC code soft decision performance degradation is investigated. Schemes improved-LLR and RCRF + LDPC code are proposed which improves both hard and soft decision CBERs by more than 50%. Compared to the FNW + LDPC code, the RCRF + LDPC code is more suitable for RRAM error correction because it does not need additional space for error addresses. In addition, the soft reset error address can be refreshed per program.
REFERENCES
[1] S.-L. Shieh, “Concatenated BCH and LDPC coding scheme with iterative decoding algorithm for flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 327–330, Mar. 2015.

[2] R. Wang, Y. Zhang, and J. Yang, “ReadDuo: Constructing reliable MLC

phase change memory through fast and robust readout,” in Proc. 46th

Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw. (DSN), Jun. 2016,

pp. 203–214.

[3] B. Li, Y. Pei, and W. Wen, “Efficient low-density parity-check (LDPC)

code decoding for combating asymmetric errors in STT-RAM,” in Proc.

IEEE Comput. Soc. Annu. Symp. VLSI (ISVLSI), Jul. 2016, pp. 266–271.

[4] S. Ning, “Advanced bit flip concatenates BCH code demonstrates 0.93%

correctable BER and faster decoding on (36 864, 32 768) emerging

memories,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 65, no. 12,

pp. 4404–4412, Dec. 2018.

[5] S. Hwang, J. Jung, D. Kim, J. Ha, I.-C. Park, and Y. Lee, “An

energy-optimized (37840, 34320) symmetric BC-BCH decoder for

healthy mobile storages,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf.

(A-SSCC), Nov. 2017, pp. 169–172.

[6] Y.-M. Lin, H.-T. Li, M.-H. Chung, and A.-Y. Wu, “Byte-reconfigurable

LDPC codec design with application to high-performance ECC of

NAND flash memory systems,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg.

Papers, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1794–1804, Jul. 2015.

[7] G. Sassine et al., “Sub-pJ consumption and short latency time in RRAM

arrays for high endurance applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phy.

Symp. (IRPS), Mar. 2018, pp. 1–5.

[8] H.-S. P. Wong et al., “Metal–Oxide RRAM,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 100, no. 6,

pp. 1951–1970, Jun. 2012.

[9] B. Chen et al., “Physical mechanisms of endurance degradation in TMO-

RRAM,” in Proc. Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) Dec. 2011,

pp. 1–4.

[10] D. Kang et al., “256Gb 3b/cell V-NAND flash memory with 48 stacked

WL layers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC),

Feb. 2016, pp. 130–131.

[11] G. Zhang, R. Sun, and X. Wang, “Construction of girth-eight QC-LDPC

codes from greatest common divisor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17,

no. 2, pp. 369–372, Feb. 2013.

[12] G. Zhang, Y. Fang, and Y. Liu, “Automatic verification of GCD con-

straint for construction of girth-eight QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun.

Lett., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1453–1456, Sep. 2019.

[13] S. Ning et al., “Reset-check-reverse-flag scheme on NRAM with 50% bit

error rate or 35% parity overhead and 16% decoding latency reductions

for read-intensive storage class memory,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,

vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 1938–1951, Aug. 2016.

[14] 16383.2131.4.104, Accessed: Jan. 2, 2019. [Online].

Available:

http://www.inference.org.uk/mackay/codes/EN/C/16

383.2131.4.104

[15] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding

performance of 3D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided

Design Integr. Circuits Syst., to be published.

[16] H. Farbeh, H. Kim, S. G. Miremadi, and S. Kim, “Floating-ECC:

Dynamic repositioning of error correcting code bits for extending the

lifetime of STT-RAM caches,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 12,

pp. 3661–3675, Dec. 2016.

[17] R. Motwani, Z. S. Kwok, and P. M. Palangappa, “Combating bit errors

from stuck cells in flash memory using novel information theory tech-

niques,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Mar. 2018,

pp. 300–304.

[18] R. Motwani, “Memory circuit defect correction,” U.S. Patent

20 170 186 500 A1, Jun. 29, 2017.

[19] S. Schechter, G. H. Loh, K. Strauss, and D. Burger, “Use ECP, not ECC,

for hard failures in resistive memories,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Int. Symp.

Comput. Archit. (ISCA), Jun. 2010, pp. 141–152.

[20] C. Ho et al., “Random soft error suppression by stoichiometric engineer-

ing: CMOS compatible and reliable 1Mb HfO2-ReRAM with 2 extra

masks for embedded IoT systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Technol.,

Jun. 2016, pp. 1–2.

[21] S. Ning, T. O. Iwasaki, and K. Takeuchi, “50 nm AlxOy ReRAM program 31% energy, 1.6× endurance, and 3.6× speed improvement

by advanced cell condition adaptive verify-reset” Solid-State Electron.,

vol. 103, pp. 64–72, Jan. 2015.

[22] A. Hera et al., “Analysis and implementation of on-the-fly stopping cri-

teria for layered QC LDPC decoders,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mixed Design

Integr. Circuits Syst. (MIXDES), Jun. 2015, pp. 287–291.

[23] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPC-

in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in

solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol.

(FAST), Feb. 2013, pp. 244–256.

[24] A. A. Emran and M. Elsabrouty, “Simplified variable-scaled min sum

LDPC decoder for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Consumer

Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), Jan. 2014, pp. 518–523.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

