IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

2149

A Real-Time Flexible Telecommunication Decoding Architecture Using FPGA Partial Reconfiguration
Longyu Ma , Student Member, IEEE, Chiu-Wing Sham , Senior Member, IEEE, Jing Sun, and Raul Valencia Tenorio

Abstract—Modern telecommunication decoding schemes, leading to high computational complexity and power consumption, are weakening the feasibility of real-time applications. In this brief, a real-time reconfigurable decoding architecture is introduced to alleviate the contradiction mentioned above. The proposed architecture is partially reconfigurable on the fly so that different decoding schemes can be deployed onto merely one physical partition of reconfigurable hardware and be switched with another without significant penalty on timing and complexity. The decoding system is implemented on an FPGA evaluation board and the experiment result shows that our approach renders ple decoding schemes implemented in one system with feasibility, simplicity and power-saving ability. By adopting our architecture and the development flow, a three-LDPC-code decoder is implemented. Moreover, nearly 50% savings on hardware logic and milli-second-level real-time switching speed for decoders are both achieved.
Index Terms—FPGA, dynamic partial reconfiguration, partial reconfiguration, LDPC.
I. INTRODUCTION
E NCODING and decoding are the most common strategies which are used to prevent and recover data that need to be sent and subsequently received in a modern communication system. As new communication standards, such as IEEE 802.11n/a/c [1], 5G, are proposed with novel technologies, meeting their requirements becomes increasingly challenging. One of consensus is adopting multiple Forward Error Correction (FEC) codes schemes instead of a single one, but a serious drawback is introduced which is the increasing complexity, difficult to be alleviated.
Besides that, platforms in which encoding and especially decoding approaches base on also have to keep being updated to meet novel standards. Especially in the last two decades, Digital Signal Processors (DSP) have been phased out and the alternatives, such as Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) and even Software Defined Radio (SDR) have gradually become
Manuscript received September 10, 2019; revised October 21, 2019; accepted November 11, 2019. Date of publication November 19, 2019; date of current version October 5, 2020. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor F. C. M. Lau. (Corresponding author: Longyu Ma.)
The authors are with the School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand (e-mail: lma792 @aucklanduni.ac.nz; b.sham@auckland.ac.nz; jing.sun@auckland.ac.nz; rval735@aucklanduni.ac.nz).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2019.2953700

mainstream choices. References [2], [3], [4] have all made contribution on implementing FEC algorithm onto FPGAs and some previous works, like [5], [6], are also achieved with ASICs. However, for ASICs, the most shortcoming is non-flexibility since all functions are fixed after manufacture. SDR seems to be still an emerging platform and it is usually designed for low-cost and low-complexity. In [7], only several hundreds Mbps throughput is reached while [8] is 3Gbps with an FPGA. Specially, some of the modules in an SDR system have to be “harden” to meet the need for protocols.
As for FPGA, it successfully balances both flexibility and ASIC-like performance, compared to other platforms above. Decoding schemes implemented on FPGAs started since long time ago. The very early designs [9], [10], [11] with one type of code rate lack the idea of flexibility, whereas a high throughput could be achieved. Such aimless effort to enhance the performance sometimes could lead to an excess of power consumption and a longer delay for the outcome of decoders when noise level sometimes isn’t very high or the device for decoding is cost-sensitive.
A decoder for limited numbers of LDPC codes is a research topic, especially for one singular standard such as IEEE 802.11 n/a/c, on which [12] bases. In this brief, the biggest number of processing units are instantiated and bypass some of them when smaller decoding scheme is needed. Taking advantage of routing intermediate results to corresponding memory location and controlling the sequence of reading and writing memory arrays, a known number of codes decoder is realized.
In order to adapt larger quantity of codes, a generic interconnection mechanism or a routing network [13], [14] is then used to multiplex processing units for decoding to support more than one code rate or code length to dynamically tune its system power, but the complex interconnection worsens the timing that may cause a synchronous digital system failed. Such idea of interconnecting could also occupy more hardware resources so as that the decoder has to run in a bigger and more expensive device at a lower clock rate than expected. What is worse is that a long project plan has to be made to compromise the longer compiling time and debugging time. Normally it could result in an uncertain project delivery once a hidden bug inside this decoder is found in the final phase of a project. Hence, an easily developed, flexible decoder concurrently with relatively lower complexity, lower power consumption, ability to deal with various communication channels, becomes desirable.

1549-7747 c 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

In this brief, a real-time flexible FEC decoding architecture based on FPGA is proposed. The main contributions of this brief are:
• We demonstrate that we can employ the FPGA capability of partially reconfigurable technology to design a cost-effective flexible LDPC decoder. The reduced logic complexity of the design can significantly decrease the power consumption of the decoding system.
• We demonstrate that the proposed design takes advantage of the appropriate scheduling of reconfiguration control so that partial bitstream files can be transported without making a significant impact on the operating throughput of the decoder.
The rest of this brief is organized as follows. In Section II, Dynamic Partial Reconfiguration technology is explained. Section III presents the proposed decoding architecture. In Section IV, three LDPC code decoders are implemented in the proposed architecture with corresponding test results followed by the conclusion in Section V.

Fig. 1. Hardware Logic Utilization rate.

II. DYNAMIC PARTIAL RECONFIGURATION
FPGA technology provides the flexibility of reprogramming a hardware-based project without changing hardware devices and has been proved to be an ideal platform for compute-intensive real-time algorithm from software onto programmable logic which is the elementary unit in an FPGA. Dynamic Paritial Reconfiguration (DPR) technology, taking this advantage one step further, makes partial hardware resource configurable.
For instance, in the IEEE 802.11ad standard, four paritycheck matrices with regard to LDPC coding and decoding schemes are defined and each matrix represents a different type of LDPC codes. In most cases, this feature can be achieved by directly implementing four of LDPC encoders and decoders. This architecture has an irreplaceable advantage: it decouples all modules concerning LDPC coding and decoding and to the greatest extent lowers the possibility of interference between them. At the same time, a bottomup design can be done through independent development of every encoder and decoder. However, if DPR methodology is accepted in the former design, the merits mentioned above can be inherited meanwhile the hardware resources could be saved considerably and the power of the whole system could also decrease. To address this concern, the former example could be abstracted like Fig. 1, (a) representing a non-partial reconfiguration design and all features must be considered and implemented in an FPGA, in spite of the fact that all features are never applied simultaneously. By applying DPR, an FPGA design like (b) allows developers to program LDPC decoder modules separately. In addition, because (b) only includes the module that needs to be activated at any time, leaving the other two in an external storage, it results in substantial free FPGA resources for other uses.
In this brief [15], video processing modules with different algorithms but the same functionality are time-multiplexed in one physical area of an FPGA using DPR. An expected algorithm bitstream is shortly loaded by the DPR controller for

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed architecture.
reconfiguration and hence a fast deployment mechanism is achieved. Reference [16] measures the power consumption of projects using DPR and indicates that DPR technology could reduce massive power consumption with proven experimental statistics.
In summary, DPR provides the Time-Division Multiplexing (TDM) capability in utilizing on-chip hardware resources and can be used in these domains below:
• Network switch for adapting to various protocols • Digital signal processing for exchanging algorithms • Encryption and decryption accelerators
III. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
A. Overview of the Architecture
Fig. 2 depicts the proposed real-time flexible decoding system implemented on an FPGA. The system is composed of one DPR partition which contains a dedicated decoding algorithm and the static logic connected to the former via AXI4 high-performance bus. The active decoding algorithm is stored and executed in the DPR partition. The rest or the static logic acts like auxiliary functions including data transferring, scheduling, parsing, handshaking and interacting with a host which sends encoded data and receives decoded data.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: REAL-TIME FLEXIBLE TELECOMMUNICATION DECODING ARCHITECTURE USING FPGA PARTIAL RECONFIGURATION
TABLE I DETAILS OF THE QC-LDPC CODES DESIGNED

2151

Fig. 3. Block diagram focusing on Main controller.
Between these two major parts, components named decouplers are applied to prevent unexpected signal glitching on partial reconfiguration. The external storage out of the FPGA is used to store full and DPR bitstream files.
In Fig. 3, as the whole system starts, the host firstly sends a Direct Memory Access (DMA) message to a specific address mapped on PCI Express BAR (Base Address Register). The message includes the DMA length, a destination address, and the source address for every DPR bitstream which are stored in the host storage originally. Another BAR space is mapped to External Storage such as DDR4 SDRAM and FLASH and its address corresponds to the destination address in the DMA. Bitstreams then are moved via a DMA channel to DDR4 SDRAM or FLASH instead of the host storage. They can be quickly accessed by the DPR controller in DDR4, regardless of sophisticated, time-consuming handshaking with the host storage. The Main controller received encoded data with a decoding scheme indicator and the final packet length during this transaction after acknowledging the finish of bitstream migration.
The bitstream including the decoding algorithm needed for the current encoded data is read by the DPR controller which reconfigures the DPR partition with the corresponding bitstream. A decouple signal is simultaneously asserted by the Main controller to enable decouplers around the DPR partition followed by a reset that lets the decoding algorithm stay in an initial state. After reconfiguration, the decoding algorithm function starts to receive the encoded data given by the Main controller and generates the decoded data that are stored in a buffer once outputted. The Main controller then sets up a flag in a register mapped to BAR space which indicates if the decoding finishes or not and can be read by the host at any time. The host is able to send another block of encoded data after sending a DMA read request for the previously decoded data.
Note that the process of partial reconfiguration is associated with a primitive or built-in module called Internal Configuration Access Port (ICAP). The DPR controller feeds the DPR bitstream to ICAP in order to exchange the original function in DPR partition with another one.

In our proposed design, we give up the GUI operation for DPR partitioning. Instead, a script language is applied because it has been found that a unit called clock region can be used to describe a Pblock or DPR Partition in size and position with a script language. Due to the known numbers of clock region in an FPGA and known numbers that a Pblcok occupies (the number need be rounded up), enumerating all possible position for Pblocks with Tcl is better than keeping drawing. Choosing the partition size for these DPR modules is normally determined empirically. To be specific, at least 20% larger than the actual required size needs to be reserved in order to prevent timing violation [17], [18].
B. Decoupling
Decouplers are implemented like “water taps” to “clamp” the data flow, especially the AXI data and control flow in the proposed design and force every signal in that bus with a default value. They are triggered by the DPR controller in the meantime certain partial bitstream is uploading to a certain Pblock. The function of decouplers is to prevent control signals across a DPR partition and static logic from glitching or being driven undesirably. After reconfiguration is done, they will be deactivated and bypassed. Specifically, in the proposed design, all signals in the AXI bus between DPR partition and FPGA static logic are under the protection of decouplers and will be clamped to invalid value “0” when a signal named “decouple” coming from the DPR controller is activated. Only in this approach, is the whole architecture able to avoid unexpected logic collision and keep functions in the static logic steady as before when partial reconfiguration issues.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We implement our design on an FPGA development kit which is Xilinx Virtex UltraScale+ FPGA VCU118 Evaluation Kit (XCVU9P-L2FLGA2104E). As the proposed decoding architecture has general applicability for a wide variety of decoders, types of decoders are not relevant. In the following experiments, three fully verified QC-LDPC decoders [19], [20] are implemented to test our design. The details of these decoders are stated in Table I, where J denotes the number of block rows, L is the number of block columns, z is the size of sub-matrix. Note that in any of experiment, QC-LDPC decoders’ clocks are all set up at 80 MHz and their throughput is also same according to [12], [20]. The performance merits are kept same, since our major contribution is not optimizing decoders’ performance. Besides, as we only focus on the feasibility of implementing decoders, most of modules related to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

Fig. 5. Overview diagram of Traditional Architecture.

Fig. 4. Experimental platform for the DPR design with 2 LDPC decoders.

TABLE II FPGA RESOURCE CONSUMPTION FOR LDPC CODE DECODERS

data generation, encoding and comparison are simulated and carried out in the Host Computer.
Fig. 4 shows the experiment platform with DPR enabled. The decoders are controlled by the Host Computer that can configure and acquire the values of the control and state registers bound to corresponding active QC-LDPC decoder. The input data and output data of LDPC decoders are generated and collected respectively by Host Computer via the PCI Express x8 (Gen3) interface. The commands from the host computer are transferred via the PCI Express bus and parsed by a module called “Instruction Parser”. Next, the parser separates PCI Express payloads into LDPC data and other commands such as decoding scheme, writing or reading control registers. The data will be directly moved to the buffer (FIFOs) as the input data for LDPC decoders. For the DPR-enabled experiment, partial bitstream files need to be uploaded into DDR4 SDRAM before Host Computer sends any instruction. The MicroController with a DMA function is responsible for moving bitstream files from PCI Express Endpoint to DDR4 and it is triggered by the Host Computer.
The comparison experiment involves another architecture depicted in Fig. 5. As modules concerning the Partial Reconfiguration are excluded, it keeps generally similar to our proposed DPR architecture. The two major differences could be the implementation of three LDPC decoders in the same FPGA and the additional multiplexer and de-multiplexer surrounding LDPC decoders which can be activated through a 2-bit exclusive register. The register is accessible to the Host Computer via PCI Express.
A. Logic Usage and Power Consumption
Table II presents the hardware usage, power estimation of implementing LDPC code decoders in three projects respectively. Design A is the design of adopting DPR. Design B is the multiplexed design with three LDPC decoders and Design C is the multiplexed design with two LDPC decoders. As for

TABLE III LUT OVERHEAD RATE COMPARISON BETWEEN DPR AND NON-DPR
measuring power of all designs above, vectorless power estimation is adopted with default static probability and toggle rate which are 0.5 and 12.5% respectively.
With adopting DPR, design A can save 56.8% ∼ 66.3% and 45.7% ∼ 49.9% logic compared to the conventional Design B and Design C respectively. When we look at the dynamic power estimation (which is even more critical), design A can give about 65.7% and 54.2% dynamic power drop compared to Design B and C respectively. This is because DPR enables a design to put the inactive decoders’ bitstream into an external storage, like DDR4 SDRAM. On the other hand, these inactive decoders have to be implemented on the FPGA in Design B and C, wasting energy. Note that all statistics are extracted from the report generated by Xilinx Vivado 2018.2.
Another comparison between the proposed design, namely Design A and the design from [12] is shown in Table III. Since the code size of LDPC codes are different, we will focus on the percentage of overhead only. Resources excluding LDPC decoders are collected and it consumes 34589 LUTs in the proposed design regardless of the number of LDPC decoders, since the extra LDPC decoder is not stored in any place of the FPGA. In other words, the resource dedicated to fulfilling multi-mode compliance takes up 16.9% LUTs. In [12], the overhead introduced by multi-mode purpose occupies 24% of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MA et al.: REAL-TIME FLEXIBLE TELECOMMUNICATION DECODING ARCHITECTURE USING FPGA PARTIAL RECONFIGURATION

2153

TABLE IV PARTIAL RECONFIGURATION TIME COMPARISON

applications with strict restrictions on power consumption or design complexity.

all LUTs with the multiplexed design used by [12]. Hence, it is less efficient than what we propose.
B. Actual Time for Partially Reconfiguring LDPC Code Decoders
This experiment is to prove the real-time property of this architecture. The partial reconfiguration time is measured and a comparison with previous works is conducted.
Note that through synthesis and implementation for the DPR project, three partial bitstream files (One for each decoder) and a full bitstream file are generated. The bitstreams are separately stored in the host storage and moved to DDR4-2400 SDRAM after the whole system starts. As we use ICAP as a configuration mode, the data width is 32bits and the clock rate is set up at 100 MHz, namely 3.2Gbps bandwidth. The test in this section is to measure the time of reconfiguring one partial bitstream.
As shown in Table IV, the time taken by DPR is relatively short. In [16], it adopts the same configuration mode, namely ICAP, but its size of DPR Partition is smaller than what we propose, which means we not only keep the relatively high speed during the DPR process, but also achieve a more complex feature on an FPGA. The reason for maintaining high-speed reconfiguration can be contributed to migrating bitstreams to DDR. It is also to be noted that the difficulty of logic implementation on FPGA is proportional to the size of the proposed logic. Reference [15] spends 1 second to upload bitstream files as JTAG may be used and it is slower than ICAP.
In the design depicted in Fig. 5, the changing of LDPC codes decoders takes several clocks or less than 1ms, but such non-DPR architecture consumes as twice or even more hardware resource as the proposed one. As the number of decoders rises, the proposed architecture consumes no more FPGA resource, but the one without DPR does.
V. CONCLUSION
In this brief, we present a refreshing approach based on FPGA Partial Reconfiguration to achieve a real-time flexible decoder architecture that utilizes less hardware logic resource and successfully reuses the LDPC decoders which can only support one code-rate and one type of code-length, making the whole system a multi-mode LDPC decoder. The powersaving, real-time switching ability in the proposed architecture has been proved by our experiments. Besides these, excellent decoupling between different decoders in a project with DPR decrease the risk of developing multiple decoders for a certain standard. We believe that this architecture will be more desirable to be applied to different types of decoders for some

REFERENCES
[1] IEEE Standard for Information Technology—Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Specific Requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.11–2016, pp. 1–3534, Dec. 2016.
[2] R. Zarubica, S. G. Wilson, and E. Hall, “Multi-Gbps FPGA-based low density parity check (LDPC) decoder design,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2007, pp. 548–552.
[3] D. M. Pham and S. M. Aziz, “An automated design methodology for FPGA-based multi-Gbps LDPC decoders,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Comput. Inf. Technol. (ICCIT), Dec. 2012, pp. 495–499.
[4] K. Wang, N.-Q. Liu, B. Sun, and H.-W. Sun, “A configurable FPGA implementation of PEG-based PS-LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE 1st Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Signal Process. Appl., Sep. 2010, pp. 670–674.
[5] T. H. Tran, Y. Nagao, H. Ochi, and M. Kurosaki, “ASIC design of 7.7 Gbps multi-mode LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.11ac,” in Proc. 14th Int. Symp. Commun. Inf. Technol. (ISCIT), Sep. 2014, pp. 259–263.
[6] Y. Yao, F. Ye, and J. Ren, “Area efficient LDPC decoder design for parallel layered decoding,” in Proc. 9th IEEE Int. Conf. ASIC, Oct. 2011, pp. 679–682.
[7] B. L. Gal and C. Jego, “High-throughput multi-core LDPC decoders based on x86 processor,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1373–1386, May 2016.
[8] Q. Lu, J. Fan, C.-W. Sham, W. M. Tam, and F. C. M. Lau, “A 3.0 Gb/s throughput hardware-efficient decoder for cyclically-coupled QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 134–145, Jan. 2016.
[9] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps bitserial block-interlaced min-sum LDPC decoder in 0.13µm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf., Sep. 2007, pp. 459–462.
[10] M. Li et al., “An energy efficient 18Gbps LDPC decoding processor for 802.11ad in 28nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf. (A-SSCC), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–5.
[11] I. Lee, M. Kim, D. Oh, and J. Jung, “High-speed LDPC encoder architecture for digital video broadcasting systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. ICT Convergence (ICTC), Oct. 2013, pp. 606–607.
[12] Q. Lu, C.-W. Sham, and F. C. M. Lau, “Rapid prototyping of multimode QC-LDPC decoder for 802.11n/ac standard,” in Proc. 21st Asia South Pac. Design Autom. Conf. (ASP-DAC), Jan. 2016, pp. 19–20.
[13] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi, and L. Hanzo, “Hardware-efficient node processing unit architectures for flexible LDPC decoder implementations,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 1919–1923, Dec. 2018.
[14] B. Chen, C. Chen, X. Du, K. Zhu, S. Li, and Y. Guo, “Design of LDPC decoder based on adaptive code length,” in Proc. 7th IEEE Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Emerg. Commun. (ICEIEC), 2017, pp. 493–497.
[15] S. U. Bhandari, S. Subbaraman, S. Pujari, and R. Mahajan, “Real time video processing on FPGA using on the fly partial reconfiguration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Signal Process. Syst., 2009, pp. 244–247.
[16] M. A. Rihani, F. Nouvel, J.-C. Prévotet, M. Mroue, J. Lorandel, and Y. Mohanna, “Dynamic and partial reconfiguration power consumption runtime measurements analysis for ZYNQ SoC devices,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst. (ISWCS), 2016, pp. 592–596.
[17] A. Dehon, “Balancing interconnect and computation in a reconfigurable computing array(or, why you don’t really want 100% LUT utilization),” in Proc. Int. Symp. Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA), vol. 99, 1999, pp. 69–78.
[18] R. Tessier and H. Giza, “Balancing logic utilization and area efficiency in FPGAs,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Field Programmable Logic Appl., 2000, pp. 535–544.
[19] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. M. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pac. Conf. Circuits Syst., Dec. 2012, pp. 475–478.
[20] L. Ma and C. W. Sham, “Optimized layer architecture for layered LDPC code decoder,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Technol. Commun. (ATC), Oct. 2018, pp. 287–291.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

