2020 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) | 978-1-7281-5784-9/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/BMSB49480.2020.9379739

Enhanced Adaptive Normalized Min-Sum
Algorithm for Layered Scheduling of 5G-NR LDPC
codes
Ziqi Zhou1, Kewu Peng1, Aleksei Krylov2, Andrey Rashich2, Dmitry Tkachenko2, Fengshuang Li1, Chao Zhang1 and Jian Song1 1Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Electronic Engineering Department,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 2Peter the Great St.Petersburg Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russia Email: zhouzq19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn, krylov.ae@edu.spbstu.ru, arashich@cee.spbstu.ru, ppdtkach@mail.ru, lfs19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {z c, jsong}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract—5G new radio low density parity check (5G-NR LDPC) codes specified by the 3rd generation partnership project (3GPP), a representative class of multi-edge-type, quasi-cyclic and raptor-like LDPC codes with rate-compatible and lengthscalable capability, could meet with high-throughput demands. The corresponding decoding algorithm and implementation should support low complexity, high performance and scaleinvariance to channel variations and receiver imperfections. Flooding scheduling is usually used for the prevalent decoding algorithms and architecture of LDPC codes, but it is inefficient and inflexible compared with layered scheduling. This paper proposes a new simplification method where the sub-groups with similar fitting functions of normalization factors are incorporated into the same type, and enhanced adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm (enhanced ANMSA) for layered scheduling is further proposed for the implementation of 5G-NR LDPC codes. Based on the new simplification method, the proposed algorithm defines three types of check nodes for base graph 2 (BG2) in 5G-NR LDPC codes, and then obtains three look-up tables for BG2 by training. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can achieve excellent performance for 5G-NR LDPC codes of different rates and lengths over Binary-input AWGN channel and Rayleigh channel.
Index Terms—5G new radio, low-density parity check codes, iterative decoding algorithm, belief propagation algorithm, enhanced adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm for layered scheduling
I. INTRODUCTION
For enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) scenarios [1], the qualified candidate channel coding solution should provide capacity-approaching performance and support ratecompatible and length-scalable feature like that in LTE-Turbo codes, and in particular, the feature that the check bits and information bits are both scalable for LDPC codes [2]. In order to fulfill the above requirements for 5G-NR, as well as highthroughput and high-flexibility capability for 5G-NR, several structural features and technical features are incorporated into 5G new radio low density parity check (5G-NR LDPC) codes [3]. Compared with conventional algorithms, 5G-NR LDPC
Corresponding Author: Jian Song (jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn)

codes need more flexible, robust but less complicated decoding algorithm by optimizing the scheduling and simplifying the processing unit.
The flooding scheduling [4], also known as two-phase message passing algorithm (TPMP), only allows the updated messages to be utilized until all horizontal or vertical processing is finished, which makes it inherently difficult to the implementation of LDPC codes with a wide range of code rates and code lengths. Therefore, the layered scheduling algorithm, also referred to as the turbo decoding message passing (TDMP), is proposed [5]. It leads to faster message-passing and significant memory savings since updated messages are used directly within an iteration to compute new messages and new check messages become directly variable messages during an iteration. Consequently, it is introduced into the training processing and decoding simulation.
Iterative decoding of LDPC codes, based on the belief propagation [6], [7], also known as the sum-product algorithm (SPA), could achieve excellent performance while the implementation is prohibitive due to its high complexity and scalevariance. Adjusted Min-Sum Algorithm (AdjMSA) [8], [9] and Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA) have been proposed to reduce the implementation complexity [10], [11]. However, AdjMSA still remains scale-variant due to the inherent tanh operations while MSA is scale-invariant, complexity-reduced but performancedegraded. On account of compensating for the performance loss in MSA, [12] and [13] proposed offset MSA (OMSA), which has no advantage over AdjMSA, and normalized MSA (NMSA) by introducing a fixed normalization factor.
The normalization factors are different for different SNR values and channel conditions, as well as different checknode degrees, which means that the fixed factor would not be optimum for each condition. As a result, in our previous work called enhanced adaptive NMSA (enhanced ANMSA) [14], we adopted look-up tables for different check-node degrees and check ratios, which is much more accurate than adaptive NMSA [15]. But the algorithm should be further improved for the multi-edge type (MET) and other novel features of 5G-

978-1-7281-5784-9/19/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:19:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NR LDPC codes whose performance is closer to the Shannon threshold than that of conventional codes.
On the basis of our previous work [14], [15], this paper proposes a new simplification method including two steps. Firstly, we obtain the fit functions of normalization factors for variant check node degrees and observe the gaps of them. Then look-up tables are respectively generated via training processing for different types if the gap is huge, or generated together if small. Compared with our previous algorithm, this simplification method is the principal improvement. As a result of the method and those look-up tables, it is feasible that the modified MSA could be applied to the decoding of MET codes. Consequently, the enhanced adaptive normalized minsum algorithm for layered scheduling of 5G-NR LDPC codes is proposed with those look-up tables.
Simulation results show that the performance of the proposed algorithm for variant rates and lengths could be comparable to that of AdjMSA with moderate complexity and robustness over AWGN and Rayleigh channel. Then final fitting functions for 5G-NR LDPC codes are shown as well.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, the simplification method is proposed and the details to construct appropriate types for BG2 in 5G-NR LDPC codes are provided. Then enhanced ANMSA for layered scheduling of 5G-NR LDPC codes is proposed in section III and the simulations are conducted with the results presented in section IV. Finally, section V concludes the paper.
II. SIMPLIFICATION METHOD BASED ON FITTING FUNCTIONS
Gallager first discovered LDPC codes and defined regular LDPC codes with stochastic structure in 1963. The notion of irregular ensembles and the constructions of rateless codes, such as Luby transform codes (LT-codes), were introduced in [16], [17]. Then Richardson and Urbanke presented a generalization of irregular LDPC codes called multi-edge-type LDPC codes [18].
Conventional single-edge-type (SET) LDPC codes could hardly achieve excellent performance at low code rates, and fail to meet rate-compatible demands with low complexity, which results in the requirement that multi-edge-type LDPC codes should be introduced. NMSA used to apply to conventional SET LDPC codes, with the same normalization factor for all edges. But adaptive normalization factors must be applied to the decoding of 5G-NR LDPC codes for they are MET and the performance is much closer to that of belief propagation, which means the factors should be dynamically adjusted according to variant types. Consequently, we need to discuss about improved decoding algorithm.
Based on our previous finding [15], the degree of check nodes plays a fundamental role when the normalization factors are adopted. We used to construct several sub-groups for specific codes according to their check-node degrees and further construct two types of check nodes by merging those subgroups depending on similar degrees. However, due to the high complexity and insufficient samples for training, the

original construction method can not be directly applied to the decoding algorithm of 5G-NR LDPC codes. In addition, the check-node degrees of the specified codes has obvious regularity, while those of 5G-NR LDPC codes, especially BG2, are relatively similar, which also limits the application of this construction method in 5G-NR. In order to keep the low complexity and enough samples, we proposed a simplified method according to different fitting functions.
Fig. 1. Fitting function of ρ - α.
Based on the observation of normalization factors fitting functions for variant check nodes degrees, the sub-groups are incorporated into different types if their corresponding fitting functions are significantly different, or regarded as the same type approximately.
For the BG2 of 5G-NR LDPC codes, the check-node degrees are dh = {3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10}. Firstly, in our previous work [15], horizontal processing outputs are obtained via Monte Carlo simulation and then classified into different subgroups based on check-node degrees. Subsequently they are used as the samples of training, by which the fitting functions are straightforward to derive. Fig. 1 depicts the fitting functions corresponding to different types. According to the observations of Fig. 1, the fitting functions for the degrees in the set dh = {3, 4}, as well as dh = {5, 6} and dh = {8, 10}, are similar, while those corresponding to different sets are divergent. Then new simplification method is proposed where different normalization factors look-up tables obtained via further training are adopted for different new types during the decoding process. For these look-up tables introduced are obtained off-line, the additional complexity of decoding is negligible, and because of such simplification method, the memory storage requirement for the decoder could also be reduced.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:19:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. ENHANCED ADAPTIVE NORMALIZED MIN-SUM ALGORITHM FOR LAYERED SCHEDULING
A. The Current Technologies
The flooding scheduling, also known as TPMP, utilizes the updated messages inefficiently, which is inherently difficult to conduct parallel processing with a wide range of rates and lengths. The layered scheduling, referred to as TDMP, is introduced into training and decoding simulation for the updated messages could be utilized more promptly and flexibly, which contributes to reducing the number of iterations and required memory bits, as well as meeting the high throughput demands.
Based on its advantages, layered scheduling is introduced into the proposed decoding algorithm for the improvement of decoding performance and the novel structural features of 5GNR LDPC codes.
The traditional decoding processing unit is based on belief propagation, which is also referred to as the SPA. Its performance is near-capacity but the implementation is prohibitive due to its high complexity.
In [8] and [9], an algorithm simplified from SPA was proposed for decoding, also known as AdjMSA. It has lower hardware implementation complexity and negligible performance loss to the SPA, but remains scale-variant. Meanwhile, another simplification of SPA is MSA, which may suffer from performance loss due to its simpler computational approach and the two-distinct-value outputs at check node side. For this reason, a performance-improved algorithm called enhanced ANMSA is proposed [15] which introduces multiple normalization look-up tables. The look-up tables depict the relationship between normalization factors and the failed check equation ratio for each check-node degree. The factors could be determined more adaptively by the ratio as well as degree, and the outputs could be closer to those of SPA than previous algorithms.
B. Proposed training and decoding process
Enhanced ANMSA is scale-invariant with negligible complexity added. Consequently, enhanced ANMSA for layered scheduling, where not only layered scheduling but also above simplification method is adopted, is proposed while taking into consideration the features of 5G-NR LDPC codes.
For the illustrative purpose, BG2 of 5G-NR LDPC codes are adopted as the parity check matrix H = [hmn]. We define N (m) \ n as the set N (m) without variable node n where N (m) means for ∀n ∈ N (m) : hmn = 1 and M (n) \ m as the set M (n) without check node m where M (n) means for ∀m ∈ M (n) : hmn = 1. Following notations are associated within one iteration. Zn: the output log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for the decoded bits, which denotes a-priori LLR of bit n deriving from the received signal after the demodulation at the first iteration, or the aposteriori LLR of bit n at subsequent iterations. Zmn: the LLR sent from variable node n to check node n. Lsmpn: the LLR sent from check node m to variable node n calculated by SPA.

Lm msn: the LLR sent from check node m to variable node n calculated by MSA. Smn: the sign of both Lm spn and Lm msn. Lmn: the final LLR value sent from check node m to variable node n. The training and decoding process of enhanced ANMSA for layered scheduling of 5G-NR LDPC codes are expressed as follows.
The training processing:
1) Initializing: generate the a-priori information LLRs with given SNR, initialize Zn and set Lmn = 0 for each m and n.
2) Iterative Processing: for each iteration, perform the following steps sequentially:
a) Calculate Zmn, Smn, Lsmpn and Lm mns as follows:

Zmn = Zn − Lmn,

(1)

Smn =

Sign(Zmn ),

(2)

n ∈N (m)\n

Lsmpn = −Smn × Ψ(

Ψ(Zmn )), (3)

n ∈N (m)\n

Lm msn

=

−Smn

×

n

min |Zmn
∈N (m)\n

|,

(4)

where the Ψ(x) is defined as Ψ(x) = log(|tanh(x/2)|). b) Incorporate all Lsmpn and Lm mns into types depending on above simplification method.
c) Turn to step 3 if termination criteria are meet, or
calculate and store the check ratio p and normal-
ization factor α for each type by

α = arg mαin{E(Lsmpn − α × Lm mns )2}. (5) d) Set Lmn = Lm spn, compute Zn as

Zn = Zmn + Lmn,

(6)

and go to a) then.
3) Repeating: change SNR value, go to step 1 again, and finally obtain multiple data collections of (ρ, α) for different types.
4) Curve fitting, sampling and quantization: get the fitting functions from above data collections and build look-up table for implementation by sampling and quantizing.
The decoding processing:
1) Initializing: for each m and n, set Lmn = 0 and initialize Zn, ∀n, to the received soft data.
2) Iterative Processing:
a) Hard decision and stopping condition: the hard decision is made by slicing Zn as

Zn > 0 ⇒ Zn = 0 & Zn < 0 ⇒ Zn = 1. (7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:19:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. BI-AWGN, k = 10, b = 384 for 5G-NR LDPC BG2.

Fig. 3. The performance gap for different code lengths and channel models.

The decoding process ends if termination criteria are meet, otherwise calculate the check ratio ρ as follows and store it.

m

si

ρ = i=1 ,

(8)

m

where s = [si] = H × Z = H × [Zn] and si is the ith element in the array s.
b) Pre-processing: calculate Zmn according to equation 1:
c) Processing: calculate Smn and Lm msn according to equations (2),(4) and (9):

Lmn = α × Lm mns ,

(9)

where the normalization factor α is chosen from
multiple look-up tables according to the check ratio ρ and the type of Lm msn. d) Post-processing: calculate Zn according to equation (6). Then go to step a).

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
AdjMSA simplifies the SPA with negligible performance loss, of which the outgoing magnitudes take on at most two distinct values, as well as MSA. However, the MSA introduces a simpler computational approach than the former, which also results in additional performance loss. Subsequently some new algorithms are proposed to make the outputs calculated by MSA approximately equal to that by SPA. Those algorithms provide performance very close to that of AdjMSA but fail to exceed because their outputs adopt two different values as well.
Simulations have been carried out to compare the block error performance of the proposed algorithm with that of SPA and AdjMSA. The BG2 of 5G-NR LDPC codes with different rates and lengths is employed, as well as BPSK

Fig. 4. Fitting function of ρ - α.
modulation and AWGN or Rayleigh channel are assumed for simplification.
Fig. 2 depicts the block error ratio (BLER) performance of the rate-1/5, rate-1/4, rate-1/3, rate-1/2, rate-2/3 and rate5/6 5G-NR LDPC codes with different decoding algorithms. At the BLER of 10−3, the maximum and minimum of the gap between new algorithm and SPA is 0.23dB and 0.03dB for rate-1/4 and rate-5/6 respectively.
Fig. 3 respectively gives the SNR threshold gaps of different rates between the proposed algorithm and SPA, as well as that between AdjMSA and SPA, for different lengths and channel models. The performance gaps between the proposed algorithm and AdjMSA decrease generally with the increase of code rate.
Moreover, three final fitting functions of normalization factors for BG2 in 5G-NR LDPC codes are generated and shown in Fig. 4, and the final look-up tables could be obtained then by sampling and quantizing those fitting functions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:19:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a new simplification method and introduce it as well as layered scheduling to the decoding algorithm of 5G-NR LDPC codes, further proposing enhanced adaptive normalization min-sum algorithm for layered scheduling. Compared with SPA and AdjMSA, the proposed algorithm simplifies the computational and storage complexity. In the proposed algorithm, multiple look-up tables are obtained by simulation and training. The horizontal processing outputs could choose the normalization factor from look-up tables adaptively. The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm could compensate for the performance loss introduced by MSA and its performance is close to that of AdjMSA.
This algorithm could expect a wide application in both 5G and broadcasting areas for its implementation facility and excellent performance.

[16] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi and D. A. Spielman, ”Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585-598, Feb 2001.
[17] M. Luby, M.Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs, in Proc. of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 249C258.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, March 2008.

REFERENCES
[1] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing and channel coding (Release 15), document 3GPP TS 38.212 v2.0.0, Dec. 2017.
[2] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, ”Design of Low-Density Parity Check Codes for 5G New Radio,” in IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28-34, March 2018.
[3] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. Chen and J. Song, ”Construction of RateCompatible Raptor-Like Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Code With Edge Classification for IDMA Based Random Access,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 30818-30830, 2019.
[4] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, ”Turbo decoder architectures for low-density parity-check codes,” Global Telecommunications Conference, 2002. GLOBECOM ’02. IEEE, Taipei, Taiwan, 2002, pp. 13831388 vol.2.
[5] D. E. Hocevar, ”A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Workshop onSignal Processing Systems, 2004. SIPS 2004., Austin, TX, 2004, pp. 107-112.
[6] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, USA, 1963.
[7] N. Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs, PhD thesis, Linkoping University, S-581 83, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[8] R1-1610140, ”LDPC decoding with adjusted min-sum”, Qualcomm, Incorporated, RAN1 #86bis, Lisbon, Portugal, 10thC14th October 2016
[9] C. Jones, E. Valles, M. Smith and J. Villasenor, ”Approximate-MIN constraint node updating for LDPC code decoding,” IEEE Military Communications Conference, 2003. MILCOM 2003., Boston, MA, USA, 2003, pp. 157-162 Vol.1.
[10] A. Jimenez Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, ”Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181-2191, Sept. 1999.
[11] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic and H. Imai, ”Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673-680, May 1999.
[12] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, ”Density evolution for two improved BPBased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208-210, May 2002.
[13] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, ”Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406-414, March 2002.
[14] L. Fan, C. Pan, K. Peng and J. Huang, ”Adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoding,” 2013 9th International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Sardinia, 2013, pp. 1081-1084.
[15] Y. Liu, K. Peng, C. Pan and L. Fan, ”Genie-aided adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoding,” 2015 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Dubrovnik, 2015, pp. 221-225.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:19:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

