Early Termination Method for LDPC Codes Based on Majority-Voted Codeword
Eunyoung Cho*, Hyunjae Lee*, Hyosang Ju*, Chanho Yoon , Young-Jo Ko , Sang-Hyo Kim*† *Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea
Future Mobile Communication Research Division Research Lab ETRI, Daejeon, Republic of Korea †iamshkim@skku.edu

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an early termination method of sum-product algorithm for few-hundred-long lowdensity parity check codes. At low signal-to-noise ratio, by comparing the decoded bits of current iteration with the majorityvoted bits, we easily find few bits which seem correctable. With the small number of correctable bits even less than threshold, we give up the decoding at an early iteration. It is verified that the proposed scheme reduces at most 43% of unnecessary iterations compared with a conventional scheme.
Index Terms—ultra-reliable and low latency communications, low-density parity check codes, sum-product algorithm, early termination
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes were first invented in 1959 by Gallager [1] and had been forgotten for several decades. In 1996, Mackay rediscoverd LDPC codes by verifying good error correcting performance [2] and they have been reboosted until now. Thereafter LDPC codes have been studied to improve the decoding performance and adopted in various wireless communication systems. Recently, they have been highlighted as a candidate of channel codes for ultrareliable and low latency communications (URLLC) and enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) scenarios of 3rd generation partnership project (3GPP) 5th generation (5G) new radio [4].
Although LDPC codes are promising due to their good error rate performance via iterative decoding, latency and high decoding complexity due to unnecessary iterations at low SNR are the problematic issues to be solved [5]. The unnecessary iterations can be removed by terminating the decoding at early iterations [6], [7]. The syndrome check method is the basic stopping method which stops decoding when the estimated codeword satisfies the parity check equation [1]. When the channel environment is poor however, the decoding algorithm cannot correct the errors and the estimated codeword never satisfies the parity check equation. Therefore, the iteration reduction does not happen. Accordingly, there are various researches for early termination (ET) methods of LDPC codes. In [6], Chen et al. suggested sign change ratio (SCR) method to compare the signs of extrinsic log likelihood ratio (LLR) of two consecutive iterations and terminate the decoding when the ratio of different signs between consecutive iterations is larger than threshold. Although this method works well on

min-sum algorithm (MSA), it does not terminate decoding early on sum-product algorithm (SPA). It implies that this scheme is improper for ultra-reliable communications since SPA performs better than MSA. Also, Shin et al. in [7] proposed the syndrome stagnancy (SS) method by checking the stagnancy of the number of unsatisfied parity check nodes. It terminates the iteration when the stagnancy lasts for certain period. Although the SS method in [7] is effective for thousands-long LDPC codes, it needs to be improved for fewhundred-long LDPC codes.
In this paper, we propose an ET method based on evaluating the current decoding result with a majority of past decoding results. It effectively reduces the iterations at low SNR since we consider the association between the SNR and majority of decoding results. Also, we verified a decrease in the number of average iterations at most 43% compared with SS [7] without a degradation of the error performance for short LDPC codes. This ET method would be effective method in repeated transmission technologies such as hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) since the ET method can lessen the overall latency and complexity in repeated transmissions.

II. ITERATIVE DECODING AND SYNDROME CHECK OF LDPC CODES
Low-density parity check codes are a class of block codes defined by a sparse parity check matrix (PCM). We consider binary (n, k) block codes where n denotes the code length and k denotes the message length. Let H be the PCM of a LDPC code, which has size m × n where m = n − k. LDPC codes achieve Shannon-limit-close performance with the belief propagation (BP) decoding as n increases [2]. The basic concept of BP decoding is repeated exchange of messages between check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs).The PCM can be represented by a bipartite graph called the ‘Tanner graph’, where a VN indicates a codeword bit and a CN and its neighbor stands for a parity check equation or a row of the PCM [8]. The edges deliver the LLR message Li expressed by

Li

=

log(

P P

(xi (xi

= =

0) 1)

)

978-1-7281-6758-9/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

1484

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ICTC 2020

where xi is considered as the i-th binary variable between 0 and 1 which is iteratively determined. The sign of Li indicates the decided value of bit xi which means that Li is positive for higher probability of xi being 0 and negative for higher probability of xi being 1. Also, a large probability of being either 0 or 1 of xi makes a higher absolute value of Li which means that the magnitude of Li shows how reliable the decision is.

gives up to decode more when a temporary codeword estimate is assessed as an uncorrectable one. Therefore, the EGU termination effectively reduces the number of iterations when the channel state is poor since the majority of codewords has a high probability of erroneously decoding at low SNR. Therefore, we focus on the EGU method for effective reduction of redundant iterations.
First, we define the observation window of size w on

While BP decoding, the i-th VN Vi sends the channel LLR the past codeword estimate. The local representative of the

Zi to its neighbor j-th CN Cj at first, and the j-th CN updates codeword estimates in the observation window is calculated

and delivers the message Mj,i calculated as

based on bit-wise majority-vote. Specifically, during recent w



Mj,i =

sgn(Qi ,j)·2 tanh-1 

tanh

i ∈N (Cj )

i ∈N (Cj )

Qi ,j 2



iterations we observe the past decoded bit cil (l − w ≤ l ≤ l − 1), the hard decision of Uil , and determine the bit cM l V,i

 between ‘0’ and ‘1’ by majority-vote. The i-th (1 ≤ i ≤ n)

majority-voted bits clMV,i at l-th iteration can be expressed by

(1) to the i-th VN Vi where N (Cj) and N (Vi) are the index sets of the VNs and the CNs connected to Cj and Vi respectively,

clMV,i =

0, 1,

for

< w
k=1

cli−k

1

w

2

else.

and Qi,j are the LLR message passed from Vi to Cj. The SPA and MSA have different CN Mj,i calculation and in this paper we consider the SPA CN operation (1) which compute the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) for each bit. After

After determining clMV,i, we compare the MV bit with the decoded bit cli of the present iteration. The MV bit is a moving average of the time series of the decoded bits cil. If

the CN operation, the updated LLR messages are summed up a erroneously decoded bit of the current iteration is same as

at the VNs and again new messages are generated and passed the MV bit (cM l V,i = cli), we suppose that the current decoded

to the CNs. The VN message is calculated as

bit is fastened. If a current decoded bit is different from the

MV bit (cM l V,i = cli), we expect that the decoded bit can

Qi,j = Zi +

Mj ,i

evolve by message-passing decoding and have a possibility

j ∈N (Vi),j =j

of correction (POC). We observe the number of decoded bits

and the extrinsic LLR Uil is given as

which are different from MV bits nc as

Uil = Zi +

Mj ,i.

j ∈N (Vi)

nc = num(i|cM l V,i = cil) where num(i|Q) is the number of i among code length n

at the l-th iteration. The erroneous codeword can be corrected thanks to the iterative message passing procedure.
At the end of each iteration, the obtained codeword cl needs to be checked whether it satisfies the parity check equation or not. The iterative decoding can be terminated at

satisfying the condition Q. By confirming the very low value of nc, which means the rare POC, we can early-give-up the decoding and avoid the unnecessary decoding iterations. Therefore, when nc becomes lower than the threshold δth (nc ≤δth) we determine to terminate the decoding.

this step. A codeword which makes the zero syndrome would be considered as the correct codeword and decoding can be stopped since further iterations would not change the decoding result once the decoding reaches a valid codeword. However, in the low SNR region, the codeword estimate cannot satisfy syndrome check until the decoder conducts the maximum number of iterations. Thus early termination rarely occurs.
III. PROPOSED EARLY TERMINATION METHOD

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, ET performance of the proposed scheme is evaluated and compared with the conventional schemes via Monte-Carlo simulation. We assume additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation. We observe block error rate (BLER) and the average number of iteration reduction for (128, 64), (192, 96), and (256, 128) codes of rate R = 1/2. The (128, 64) and

In this section, we propose an early termination method (256, 128) codes are taken from the CCSDS standard [9] and

for decoding short LDPC codes. The ET method gets rid of the (192, 96) code is a Wimax-type LDPC code by [10]. The

unnecessary iterations by stopping the decoding at an early simulation is conducted under the SPA decoding with the

stage. We can consider two ET approaches in general which maximum number of iterations set to 20 and the threshold

are early confirm (EC) and early give-up (EGU) termination. δth set as 1 or 2. If a codeword estimate seems reliable, we can assess the Fig. 1 displays the BLER performances of the proposed

codeword as a correct codeword at an early iteration and the scheme and the conventional schemes for the (128, 64),

EC termination occurs. The syndrome check is the intrinsic EC (192, 96), and (256, 128) codes, respectively. It is shown that

termination method. On the other hand, the EGU termination the error rate performance is not degraded while the number

1485
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Comparison of block error rate for (128, 64), (192, 96), and Fig. 2. Comparison of the average number of iteration reduction for (128, 64),

(256, 128) codes

(192, 96), and (256, 128) codes

of decoding iterations are reduced at the same time. The parameters of decoding and ET such as block length and σth also affect the error performance. For the simulation, we set σth = 2 for (128, 64) and σth = 1 for (192, 96) and (256, 128). This means that decoding is stopped if less than (or equal to) 1 or 2 bits seem correctable since they are too few to proceed resource consuming iterative decoding for such a small chance of success. Therefore, in this case an early giveup termination is considered as a better choice. The proposed scheme reduces the average number of iteration without error performance degradation.
Fig. 2 exhibits how earlier the decoding stops on average by the proposed scheme than the conventional schemes for (128, 64), (192, 96) and (256, 128) codes, respectively. As Fig. 2 shows, the ET algorithm in SCR method [6] does not work at all with SPA decoding, as it was developed for the MSA. Also, SS method [7] needs an ET performance improvement for few-hundred-long LDPC codes. The proposed scheme is effective for ET of short LDPC codes since the scheme can discriminate the codewords which can be early given up by confirming the possibility of correction. Use of the MV codeword is helpful to detect the trapped state of decoding at an early iteration in low SNR. For the (128, 64) code, the proposed scheme is very effective in the ET performance from low SNR to mid SNR. At −0.5 dB, the proposed ET scheme reduces 2 iterations (38%) compared with SS method on average. From 0.5 dB, BLER starts to shrink less than 1 and at 1.0 dB and 1.5 dB the proposed scheme reduces about

5 (43%) iterations and 3 (30%) iterations from SS method, respectively as Fig. 1 (a) and Fig. 2 (a) depict. For the (192, 96) code, Fig. 1 (b) and Fig. 2 (b) show no BLER degradation and reduction of the average number of iteration of about 4 iterations (30%) at 0dB with the proposed scheme as compared to SS method [7]. For the (256, 128) code, the proposed scheme decreased about 4 iterations (32%) at 1.0 dB where BLER initiates to lessen from 1 and about 5 iterations (34%) at 1.5 dB as Fig. 1 (c) and Fig. 2 (c) show.
At a low SNR, for the (256, 128) code we can observe that the ET performance of the SS method is better than that of the proposed one. However, it is better to cancel decoding than to run decoding with early stopping if the estimated SNR is so low as the expected BLER is 1. Since our main target SNR range starts where BLER begins to drop, we can confirm that the proposed scheme is very effective on ET in target range. We can also expect the decoding complexity reduction since the average number of iterations is dominant factor for the operational complexity [11].
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed the new ET scheme for LDPC codes. We observed the statistics of codeword bit values from the decoding history and did majority-vote making newly decided codeword. By comparing the current codeword with majority-voted codeword, we count the number of correctable bits and compare it with threshold to give-up the remaining unnecessary iterations. For short LDPC codes, we verified the proposed ET scheme leads to effective iteration reduction.

1486
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

At most 43% iteration reduction was confirmed via the new scheme.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute(ETRI) grant funded by the Korean government [2019-0-00002, Development of On-Time · OnRate Wireless Access and Optical Edge Cloud Networking Technologies for High-Precision Services].
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, ”Low-density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8. no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. Mackay and R. M. Neal, ”Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1645-1646, July 1996.
[3] M. Series, “IMT Vision–Framework and overall objectives of the future development of IMT for 2020 and beyond,“ Recommendation ITU, 2083. 2015.
[4] 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), “Multiplexing and channel coding,” 3GPP 38.212 V15.2.0, June 2018.
[5] M. Shirvanimoghaddam, et al, ”Short block-length codes for ultrareliable low latency communications,” IEEE Comm. Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 130-137. Feb. 2019.
[6] Y. H. Chen, Y. J. Chen, X. Y. Shih, and A. Y. Wu, “A channel-adaptive early termination strategy for LDPC decoders,” IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Oct. 2009, pp. 226-231.
[7] B. Shin, S. H. Kim, H. Park, J. S. No. and D. J. Shin, ”New stopping criteria for iterative decoding of LDPC codes in H-ARQ systems,” International Journal of Communication Systems, vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1475-1484. Nov. 2013.
[8] R. M. Tanner, ”A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 399-431, Sep. 1981.
[9] Short Block Length LDPC Codes for TC Synchronization and Channel Coding, CCSDS 231.1-O-1, Apr. 2015.
[10] M. Helmling and S. Scholl, “Database of channel codes and ML simulation results,” University of Kaiserslautern URL: www.unikl.de/channelcodes, 2016.
[11] R1-166772, Performance analysis of polar codes, Samsung, 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 86, Gothenburg, Sweden, Aug. 2016.
1487
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

