 
A Modified Min Sum Decoding Algorithm based on 
Approximation Enhancement for LDPC Codes 
Nam-Il KIM,  Seung-Que LEE, Jin-Up KIM 
Communication & Media Research Laboratory 
ETRI 
Daejeon, KOREA  
namilk@etri.re.kr, sqlee@etri.re.kr,  jukim@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Min-sum algorithm(MSA) and its modification 
are used in LDPC decoder implementations because of its error 
performance and low computation complexity. In this paper a 
modified 
min-sum 
LDPC 
decoding 
algorithm 
through 
approximation enhancement using the smallest three minimum 
values is presented. The proposed algorithm improves error 
performance and reduces decoder iterations. From the 
simulation results for 5G NR LDPC codes, we show that the 
proposed algorithm can achieve about 1.6dB improvement of 
FER compared to the min-sum decoding algorithm and provide 
about 10% reduction of the average iteration numbers compare 
to NMSA with optimum normalization factor. 
Keywords— Error correction coding, LDPC codes, Minimum 
Sum Decoder, Approximation Enhancement  
I. INTRODUCTION  
Low density parity check (LDPC) codes were initially 
proposed by R.Gallager in 1963 [1] but they were not used for 
three decades because of the practical implementation issue. 
LDPC code, rediscovered by MacKay [2] in 1995 with 
moderate decoding complexity, has been included in many 
standards due to its excellent error correction performance. 
They appeared as a good solution for Forward Error 
Correction (FEC) systems and were adopted by many 
advanced standards such as 3GPP 5G NR [3]. 
There are lots of decoding algorithms for LDPC code that 
show different advantages over decoder implementations. The 
Belief Propagation Algorithm (BPA) shows the good 
performance but most complex LDPC code decoding 
algorithms. The min-sum algorithm (MSA) is a simplified 
version to reduce decoding complexity compared to BPA, but 
it can cause the performance degradation in terms of bit error 
rate (BER) or frame error rate (FER) because of its rough 
approximation. The modified min-sum algorithms were 
introduced to compensate the approximation error and 
improve the BER and FER performance of MSA [5]-[9] such 
as Normalized Minimum Sum Algorithm (NMSA) and Offset 
Minimum Sum Algorithm (OMSA) using normalization 
factor and offset value, respectively. 
In this paper, we introduce a modified min-sum LDPC 
decoding algorithm. The algorithm introduces the min-sum 
approximation to achieve a better performance in BER/FER  
and reduce the iteration numbers compared with classic min-
sum algorithm. Monte Carlo simulations over 5G NR LDPC 
show that the proposed approximation enhancement MSA 
decoding achieves better performance than MSA decoding in 
terms of BER/FER. Also, we provide the simulation results to 
verify that the error performance and iteration process 
performance of the proposed scheme and others such as SPA, 
MSA and NMSA.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, we provide a brief overview of 5G NR LDPC codes. 
We describe the iterative layered decoding scheduler and 
LDPC decoding algorithm such as SPA and MSA in Section 
III and illustrates the proposed modified decoding algorithm 
in Section IV. We describes the simulation results in Section 
V and concludes this paper in Section VI. 
II. 5G NR LDPC CODE 
5G LDPC codes [3] are quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes 
where the parity-check matrix (PCM) is defined by a smaller 
base matrix. In 5G NR LDPC code, there are two types of base 
graphs, base graph1 and base graph2 which is determined by 
a length of information bits and code rate. Each entry of the 
base matrix has either a Z x Z zero matrix  or a shifted identity 
Z x Z matrix to be applied right  cyclic shift of each row. The 
structure of the 5G LDPC base graph 1 and 2 can be explained 
by using Figure 1 and Figure 2. The structure of base graph 1 
is 46 × 68 in size with mother code rate of 1/3. The structure 
of base graph 2 is 42 × 52 in size with mother code rate of 1/5.  
 
Fig. 1. 5G LDPC base graph 1. 
 
Fig. 2. 5G LDPC base graph 2. 
III. SCHEDULING AND DECODING ALGORITHM OF 
LDPC CODE  
A. Layered Scheduling BP algorithm for LDPC code 
Conventional decoding scheduler send messages to their 
neighbors for all variable nodes and subsequently all the check 
nodes in each iteration. In the layered method, the updating of 
nodes is processed in a serial schedule which propagates the 
message twice as fast. The Layered LDPC decoding algorithm 
[10] schedules the decoding algorithm to reduce process time 
1407
978-1-7281-6758-9/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
ICTC 2020
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
without degradation of the BER performance. The message 
propagation scheme can reduce the iterations by half. We 
summarize the layered scheduling algorithm. Denote 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 as 
channel information, 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 as total information, 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 as check 
information, 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄 as temporary bit information and N(c) as 
valid variable node set for check node. 
BPA provides excellent decoding performance. Its 
decoding procedure starts with an initial likelihood ratio (LLR) 
of probability calculation, as shown in equation (1). 
                                𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣=  𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣(0)
𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣(1)                                 (1) 
With the initial likelihood ratio, the check nodes and 
variable node information can be updated. In its each iteration, 
the update of information of check nodes(𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐∈𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶) and variable 
node(𝜈𝜈𝜈𝜈∈𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉) follows: 
initialization: 
for ∀ 𝜈𝜈𝜈𝜈∈𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉, 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐∈𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣←0 
for ∀ 𝜈𝜈𝜈𝜈∈𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣←𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 
 
iteration: 
for ∀ 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐∈𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 
   for 𝜈𝜈𝜈𝜈∈N(c) 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐←𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 
 S𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚←∑
𝜑𝜑𝜑𝜑( 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)
ν∈N(c)
 
   for 𝜈𝜈𝜈𝜈∈N(c) 
       S𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠← ෑ
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠( 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)
ν′∈N(c)\v
   
       𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣← S𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 ∙ 𝜑𝜑𝜑𝜑(S𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚𝑚− 𝜑𝜑𝜑𝜑(𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)) 
       𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣← 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐+ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣 
end of loop 
end of loop 
 
Where 𝜑𝜑𝜑𝜑(𝑥𝑥𝑥𝑥) =  −log ቀtanh ቀ
𝑥𝑥𝑥𝑥
2ቁቁ= log ቀ
𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑥𝑥𝑥𝑥+1
𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑥𝑥𝑥𝑥−1ቁ            (2) 
B. Min-sum decoding algorithm 
The BPA provide good error performance but there are too 
many computations which is very difficult for implementation 
in commercial decoders.  
MSA simplifies the calculation of Equation (2) to the 
minimum value search. So, equation (2) is updated as follows. 
for ∀ c ∈C  
    for ∀ ν ∈N(c) 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐= 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣                              (3) 
    for ∀ ν ∈N(c)  
       𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣=
ෑ
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(
ν′∈N(c)\ν
𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐) ∙min
ν′∈N(c)|𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐|       (4) 
       𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐+ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣                                                    (5) 
   end of loop 
end of loop 
 
In (4) the 𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(∙) is the multiplication value of sign for 
symbol and min|∙| is the absolute value of the symbol. The 
other parts of MSA are same as BPA.  
C. Normalization MSA and Offset MSA  
Since MSA entails a loss of error correction ability due to 
the approximation of BPA, NMSA with the normalized value 
and OMSA with the offset are used in the following update of 
the check node. 
The Check node update of NMSA is as follows. 𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼 in the 
equation below is the normalization factor. 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼∙∏
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)
ν′∈N(c)\ν
∙min
ν′∈N(c)|𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐|        (6) 
The Check node update of O-MSA is as follows. 𝛽𝛽𝛽𝛽 in the 
equation below is the offset value. 
𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= ∏
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐)
ν′∈N(c)\ν
 ∙ max ( min
ν′∈N(c)|𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐| − 𝛽𝛽𝛽𝛽, 0)    
(7) 
NMSA and OMSA provide good error performance 
compared to MSA but they require extra calculation to get the 
optimum values of 𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼 and 𝛽𝛽𝛽𝛽. 
 
IV. PROPOSED MODIFIED MIN-SUM DECODING 
ALGORITHM  
Min-sum decoding algorithm through approximation 
enhancement is proposed. The min-sum decoding algorithm 
reduced the computation complexity of the equation (2) by 
using minimum search instead of complex calculation, which 
introduced new approximation error but reduced complexity. 
To reduce the approximation error of min-sum decoding 
algorithm, we applied the more information of minimum 
value to min-sum decoding to improve the error performance 
and reduce the iteration numbers. 
In MSA, the value of the variable node having the 
minimum value among all the neighboring variable nodes in 
the check node loop is used to update the check node, whereas 
in proposed algorithm, the smallest three minimum values and 
its corresponding index among all the neighboring variable 
nodes in the check node loop are extracted. where the 1st  
minimum value v1 is min
ν∈N(c)|𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐| , the 2nd minimum 
value v2 is
min
ν∈N(c)\v1|𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐| and the 3rd minimum value 
v3 is
min
ν∈N(c){v1,v2}|𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐|.  vidx1, vidx2, and vidx3 are 
variable node indexes ν with values of v1, v2, and v3, 
respectively. Therefore, the relationship between v1, v2, and 
v3 is as follows. 
                    v1 ≤v2 ≤v3                                               (8) 
Then, the calculation of the minimum value for the check 
node information is performed as follows. 
                   f(x, y) = (x * y)/(x + y)                                    (9) 
The decoding of proposed MSA is as follows. 
initialization:  
 for ∀ ν ∈V, c ∈C 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 0                                           
 for ∀ ν ∈V      𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣                                           
iteration: 
 for ∀ c ∈C  
   for ∀ ν ∈N(c) 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐=  𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣−𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣                         
   for ∀ ν ∈N(c) get {v1, v2, v3}                                        (10) 
   for ∀ ν ∈N(c)           
     if(ν = vidx1)           𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄=  f(v2, v3)                          (11) 
    else if(ν = vidx2)   𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄=  f(v1, v3)                         (12) 
    else                             𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄=  f(v1, v2)                          (13) 
1408
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
     𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= ∏
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(
ν′∈N(c)\ν
𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣) ∙ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄                     (14) 
     𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐+ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣                                                   (15) 
  end of loop  
end of loop 
In order to compensate for the degradation in decoding 
performance due to the approximation of the conventional 
MSA, the three minimum values are calculated in (10), and 
minimum value is processed in (11,12,13) for updating the 
check node of (14). 
The check node information of (15) can be normalized as 
follows to obtain a performance gain in a high SNR region. 
The procedure for updating the check node through 
normalization is as follows. 𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼 is the normalization factor. 
          𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣= 𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼∏
𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠(
ν′∈N(c)\ν
𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑣𝑣𝑣𝑣′𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐) ∙𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄𝑄              (16) 
V. SIMULATION RESULTS  
Simulations were performed on LDPC of 3GPP 38.212 
NR using BG1 and BG2 with Z128. The maximum iteration 
number of LDPC decoding algorithm is set to 40. And early 
stop termination using syndrome check is used. Simulations 
were made between BPA, MSA, NMSA and the proposed 
decoding algorithm under AWGN channel each for 1,000,000 
times to get average value for Frame Error Rate (FER) and 
iteration number comparison. 
 
Fig. 3. FER performance (5G NR base graph1). 
 
Fig. 4. FER performance (5G NR base graph2). 
From the Figure 3 and Figure 4, we can see the FER 
performance for 5G NR LDPC code with base graph 1 and 
base graph2. The performance of the proposed modified MSA 
for base graph 1 is better than conventional MSA and shows 
performance similar to that of N-MSA with optimal 
normalization factor(𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼 = 0.65) applied. Proposed decoding 
algorithm without normalization show the FER performance 
degradation at high SNR. With optimal normalization factor(𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼 
= 1.1), we compensated for the performance degradation at 
high SNR. In base graph 2, simulation shows performance 
degradation at high SNR. 5G NR bg2 uses a relatively small 
sized H matrix compared to bg1, and the effective elements of 
rows and columns of the H matrix is different. With optimal 
normalization factor(𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼 = 1.1), we prevent the performance 
degradation at high SNR and shows performance to that of N-
MSA with optimal normalization factor (𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼 = 0.65). 
 
Fig. 5. Iterative number comparison (5G NR base graph1). 
 
Fig. 6. Iterative number comparison (5G NR base graph2). 
The Iteration number is related to the process time and 
power consumption of decoder implementation. From the 
Figure 5 and Figure6, we can see the average iteration 
numbers of proposed algorithm are less than MSA and N-
MSA( 𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼= 0.65) for base graph 1 and 2. With optimal 
normalization factor(𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼 = 1.1), the proposed algorithm reduce 
the iteration number more. 
The FER performance of the proposed MSA with 
approximation enhancement is about 1.6dB improvement 
compared to MSA, and the average iterations are reduced 
1409
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
almost 10% compared to the N-MSA with optimum 
normalization factor.  
Consequently, the proposed decoding algorithm can give 
good FER performance and reduce the process time of 
decoding compare to MSA and N-MSA. 
VI. CONCLUSION  
A modified MSA based on approximation enhancement is 
proposed in this paper. We have presented a performance 
comparison of the 5G NR LDPC code usage of several 
existing decoding algorithms such as SPA, MSA and NMSA. 
Through the simulation results, the proposed algorithm 
achieved better performance in FER and reduced the average 
number of iterations compared to the min-sum algorithm. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by the Korean government (MSIT). [No. 2016-0-00183, 
Development of 5G mobile access platform technology based 
on virtualization converged with computing] 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density-Parity-Check Codes. J. IRE Transactions on 
Information 
Theory, 
8, 
1 
(Jan. 
1962), 
21-28. 
DOI: 
10.1109/TIT.1962.1057683. 
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse 
matrices," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, 
pp. 399-431, March 1999. 
[3] 3GPP: TS 38.212 NR; Multiplexing and channel coding (Release 15), 
2020. 
[4] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic and H. Imai, "Reduced complexity 
iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief 
propagation," in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 5, 
pp. 673-680, May 1999. 
[5] Jinghu Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, "Near optimum universal belief 
propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes," 
in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406-414, 
March 2002. 
[6] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, "Density evolution for two improved 
BP-Based 
decoding 
algorithms 
of 
LDPC 
codes," 
in IEEE 
Communications Letters, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208-210, May 2002. 
[7] Jinghu Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier and Xiao-
Yu Hu, "Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes," in IEEE 
Transactions on Communications, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288-1299, Aug. 
2005. 
[8] Jinghu Chen, R. M. Tanner, C. Jones and Yan Li, "Improved min-sum 
decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes," Proceedings. 
International Symposium on Information Theory, 2005. ISIT 2005., 
Adelaide, SA, 2005, pp. 449-453. 
[9] F. Alberge, "Min-Sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes with adaptive 
scaling based on mutual information," 2016 9th International 
Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing 
(ISTC), Brest, 2016, pp. 71-75. 
[10] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn and J. Goldberger, "An efficient message-passing 
schedule for LDPC decoding," 2004 23rd IEEE Convention of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 2004, 
pp. 223-226. 
 
1410
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
