Efficient Sliding Window Decoding of Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes for Broadcasting
Zhitong He1, Kewu Peng2, Jian Song3, and Yushu Zhang4 Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Tsinghua University Beijing, P. R. China 1hezt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, 2pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn, 3jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn, 4zh1y2sh3@126.com

Abstract—Spatially-coupled low-density parity-check (SCLDPC) codes, which are capable of universally achieving capacity over different channels, could be a potential candidate of error control channel codes employed in flexible transmission schemes for future broadcasting systems. Sliding window decoding is believed the preferred decoding method for SC-LDPC codes, due to its lower decoding latency and complexity compared to conventional full belief propagation (BP) decoding, and is studied in this paper for SC-LDPC codes under broadcasting scenario. More specially, the optimal window size for sliding window decoding is investigated in this paper to improve the decoding performance under practical constraints of decoding complexity and latency in broadcasting systems. The early termination strategies are also considered to further reduce the decoding complexity. Finally, simulation results are presented, which demonstrate that the proposed sliding window decoding method has decoding complexity comparable to conventional LDPC decoding and shows consistent excellent decoding performance.
Keywords—Spatially-coupled low-density parity-check (SCLDPC) code, sliding window decoding, optimal window size, early termination (ET), broadcasting.
I. INTRODUCTION
Future broadcasting systems should provide various transmission rates for different services. Thus, different coded modulation modes and channel conditions should be supported in the forward error control (FEC) channel coding schemes. However, conventional LDPC codes are generally designed and optimized towards specific scenarios, and may face decoding performance degradation or even decoding failure when these conditions are changed or unknown at transmitter side. Spatially coupled (SC-) LDPC codes, which are capable of universally achieving capacity over different channels [1]–[3], is a good candidate of FEC channel coding schemes for future broadcasting. A type of quasi-cyclic (QC-) SC-LDPC codes and its relative QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is proposed in our previous work [4], which are demonstrated to be very robust and perform well under different coded modulation modes and channel conditions via analysis and simulation.
SC-LDPC codes that are optimized towards universally capacity-approaching performance normally require a long coupling length L. Thus, conventional full belief propagation
This work was supported by BNRist under the contract number of BNR2019RC01015.

(BP) decoding would bring in huge decoding complexity, consuming too much hardware resources and leading to huge decoding latency. Sliding window decoding, which is proposed in [5], takes advantage of the inherent convolutional or spatialcoupling structure of SC-LDPC codes and makes the decoding latency and complexity independent of L [6]. With the decoding latency and complexity greatly reduced, sliding window decoding can be employed to fulfill the high throughput and low latency requirements for future broadcasting systems.
Compared to conventional full BP decoding, sliding window decoding is more flexible and the configurations of sliding window decoder can be properly adjusted to improve the decoding performance if practical constraints are not considered. For example, the window is allowed to shift backward and forward to avoid burst-like error patterns [6]. Nevertheless, to simplify the hardware implementation and include the decoding latency and complexity into consideration, the window is only allowed to shift forward in this paper.
In this paper, we mainly considered two aspects of the sliding window decoder configurations. Firstly, different from previous works [6]–[8], it is observed from simulation results that there exists an optimized window size that shows the best decoding performance under constraints of equal decoding complexity. Therefore, the optimized window size in broadcasting systems should be determined and may influence the construction and employment of SC-LDPC for broadcasting.
Secondly, the early termination (ET) condition is introduced and the choice of ET condition is qualitatively analyzed in this paper. Different from [8], the ET condition includes when to stop the iteration within the current window and whether to stop the decoding or slide to next window. It is verified through simulation that the proposed ET condition can largely reduce the decoding complexity under channel conditions of both high and low SNR and keep the decoding performance.
Finally, it can be observed from simulation results that the proposed sliding window decoding has decoding complexity comparable to that of conventional LDPC decoding and consistently shows the excellent decoding performance.
II. SC-LDPC AND SLIDING WINDOW DECODING
An SC-LDPC code can be constructed by coupling together the Tanner graphs of L uncoupled LDPC codes with smooth-

978-1-7281-8878-2 / 20 / $ 31.00 © 2020 IEEE

102

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ing parameter w. In practical broadcasting systems, SC-LDPC

codes with quasi-cyclic structure which is suitable for high-

throughput implementation is adopted. Moreover, the base

matrices and edge spreading patterns of all uncoupled codes

are assumed to be the same as in [4] to simplify the description

and reduce the implementation complexity. More specifically,

the base matrix of a QC-SC-LDPC code can be described as

follows

 B0



 B1 B0



  

...

B1 . . .

  

 BSC = Bw

...

...



B0

 

(1)

  

Bw

...

  B1 

  

...

...

  

Bw (L+w)Munc×LNunc

where all the base matrices of uncouple LDPC codes have size Munc × Nunc, and the edge spreading pattern for every uncoupled code is Bpattern = BT0 , BT1 , . . . , BTw T , (·)T denotes transposition. To reduce the inherent rate loss, the last ∆w rows of BSC are removed, and the final size MSC × NSC of BSC is MSC = (L + w)Munc − ∆w, NSC = LNunc. The base matrix BSC is lifted with lifting factor Z to construct the final parity check matrix, where the zeros and ones in BSC is replaced by Z × Z zero matrices and Z × Z circulant or general permutation matrices. The size mSC × nSC of the final parity check matrix is mSC = MSCZ, nSC = NSCZ.
The windows of sliding window decoding in this paper

are check node centered [8], i.e. each window consists of

several consecutive check nodes and all related variable nodes.

Based on the QC-SC-LDPC code constructed in our previous

work [4] and for the convenience of description, a layer is defined as Z consecutive rows which corresponds to a row in the base matrix [9]. Thus, a window of size Nw exactly consists of check nodes of Nw consecutive layers and all the related variable nodes. More specifically, as shown in Fig.1,

the layers of the final parity check matrix are numbered from 1 to MSC, from top to bottom, and there exists MSC + Nw − 1 windows of size Nw in total, numbered from k = 2 − Nw to k = MSC, where the window numbered k exactly consists of layers numbered from max (1, k) to min (k + Nw − 1, MSC). The windows which consists of the first layers or the last layers may have less than Nw layers because of the boundary condition of window sliding. The sliding window decoder starts at the window numbered k = 2 − Nw. When the reliability conditions of the window numbered k are fulfilled,

the sliding window decoder slides to the window numbered k + 1, until the last window is reached or the decoding is

stopped.

To compare sliding window decoding method and conven-

tional full BP decoding method or only sliding window decoding methods with different window size Nw or different ET conditions fairly, the decoding complexity of sliding window

decoding should be properly defined. Generally, the decoding

Fig. 1. Windows of Sliding Window Decoding.

of parity-check component codes for horizontal processing takes the major part of the decoding complexity of LDPC codes. Thus, the number of horizontal processing operations can represent the decoding complexity. More specifically, assuming the total number of horizontal processing operations at the layer numbered j within all the windows is Ij, the decoding complexity I¯ can be defined as

I¯ =

MSC j=1

Ij

(2)

MSC

The decoding complexity of sliding window decoding defined in this way is consistent with the definition of decoding complexity for conventional full BP decoding.
In this paper, the QC-SC-LDPC code used for simulations is the same as that proposed in our previous work [4]. More specifically, the base matrix of uncoupled codes has the size of Munc = 1, Nunc = 3, the coupling length is L = 40, the smoothing parameter is w = 6 and the last ∆w = 4 rows of the base matrix are removed. The final parity matrix are constructed through two-step lifting with total lifting factor Z = 768, thus the final code length is nSC = 92160. The rate of the uncoupled code is Rtrue = 2/3, and the rate of the final QC-SC-LDPC code is Rdesign = 13/20.

III. CONFIGURATIONS OF THE SLIDING WINDOW DECODER
A. Choice of Window Size

Fig. 2. SNR threshold vs. total decoding complexity curves for different window sizes at BER=10−5 over BI-AWGN channel using layer-scheduled
decoding.

103
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Window size is an important parameter in the configuration of the sliding window decoder. The asymptotic decoding performance of the sliding window decoder is generally monotonically improving with the increase of window size Nw when the code length and decoding iteration are assumed infinite [5]. Nevertheless, under practical constraints of finite code length and number of decoding iteration, the selection of the window size Nw is usually a trade-off among the decoding performance, the memory resources, the computing resources, and other factors, which is not seriously considered in previous works of sliding window decoder [6]–[8].
Generally, the decoding performance, or the corresponding signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) threshold, will be improved, as the decoding complexity is increased. However, the window size will directly influence the behavior of decoding complexity vs. decoding performance and the decoding performance under constraint of decoding complexity could be optimized by judicious selection of the window size. Hence the following experiments are conducted, where the SNR threshold at the same bit error rate (BER) limit for several consecutive numbers of window size Nw under constraint of decoding complexity is compared. The ET conditions are not considered and the number of iterations that the sliding window decoder performs on each window is assumed identical. The layer-scheduled decoding [9] is employed and the constraints of decoding complexity NwI is set as 30-60 throughout this paper, which is the normal constraint of layer-scheduled decoding in practical systems. The simulation is conducted over binary-input (BI-) AWGN channel and the BER limit is set 10−5.
As shown in Fig. 2, the window size notably affects the decoding performance under constraints of decoding complexity, and there exists an optimal window size, i.e., Nw = 16, for the curve Nw = 16 has lower SNR threshold values within most total iteration region than other curves. The simulation result in Fig. 2 also shows that the decoding performance is very robust, and similar performance can be obtained when the window size is slightly changed around the optimal window size. Hence the window size can be adjusted dynamically near the optimal value as needed.
Moreover, due to the high correlation between the window size and the decoding complexity, the choice of window size would influence the decoding complexity and the design of SC-LDPC codes reversely. In other words, the optimal window size could be an important parameter to optimize in the design of SC-LDPC codes.
B. Choice of the Early Termination strategies
The ET conditions is generally to decide when to stop the iteration within the current window when the iteration number doesn’t reach the max iteration number but the degradation of decoding efficiency within the window is notable. The ET strategies in previous works can mainly be separated into two distinct approaches: the parity check (PC-) based approach [8] and the log likelihood ratio (LLR-) based approach [6], [7]. The PC-based approach examines how the parity-check equations related to the current window are satisfied, while the

LLR-based approach normally estimates the average soft BER based on the output LLR of each variable node. Generally, the PC-based approach brings in extra lower complexity than the LLR-based approach. Nevertheless, the PC-based approach shows weaker ability to detect bit errors than the LLR-based approach, for PC-based approach may face the problem of unpredictable and unstable satisfaction to parity-check equations since some variable nodes will have their output LLRs around zero and the signs are therefore, changed frequently.
To solve the inherent problem of the PC-based approach and maintain its merit of extra low complexity, in this paper the PC-based approach is slightly modified so that some of parity check equations related to the current window should be satisfied consecutively and repeatedly while the value signs of corresponding output LLRs of these parity check equations should remain unchanged. Therefore, the probability of undetected bit errors will be largely reduced, and the satisfaction of parity-check equations would be predictable and stable accordingly.
Moreover, the ET conditions in this paper also includes whether to stop decoding or slide to next window after the decoding of the current window is done. Therefore, the decoding can be stopped in time when error propagation may lead to high probability of decoding failure in the following windows. In this paper, the ET condition of stop-decoding is also PC-based, where the ratio of not-satisfied parity check equations related to the current window is the criterion to stop iteration and decoding.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
With the consideration of the QC-SC-LDPC code used for simulations, the specific ET conditions are set as follows. The decoding iteration within the current window is stopped earlier when the parity check equations of the first three layers within the window are consecutively satisfied for respectively not less than 3, 3, 2 iterations, while the value signs of corresponding output LLRs of these parity check equations remain unchanged. The window decoding is stopped earlier when the rate of not-satisfied parity-check equations of the first three layers all exceed the threshold value p = 0.0625. For the convenience of description, ’No ET’ denotes the ET conditions are not considered, ’ET1’ denotes only the first part of ET conditions (i.e. when to stopped the decoding iteration within the current window earlier) are considered, while ’ET2’ denotes both ET conditions are considered.
BLER simulations are carried out to compare the decoding complexity and decoding performance of ’ET1’, ’ET2’ and ’No ET’ and show the effectiveness and efficiency of proposed ET conditions. According to the simulation results in section III-A and practical constraints of decoding complexity, the optimal window size Nw = 16 is chosen and the max iteration number within each window is set as Imax = 2. The simulations are conducted over BI-AWGN channel.
Fig. 3(a) shows the variation of decoding complexity when ET conditions are considered. Obviously, the decoding complexity is largely reduced when both ET conditions are consid-

104
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, sliding window decoding is employed as the

decoding method of SC-LDPC codes for broadcasting. The

effectiveness and efficiency of optimal window size under

constraints of decoding complexity is observed via simulation,

and can influence the design of SC-LDPC codes. The pro-

posed PC-based ET strategies can largely reduce the decoding

complexity especially at high or low SNR region with negli-

gible performance degradation, and is beneficial to hardware

implementation and practical application of SC-LDPC codes.

(a)

Finally, the proposed sliding window decoding is shown to

have decoding complexity comparable to conventional LDPC

decoding and excellent and consistent decoding performance.

(b) Fig. 3. (a) The ratio of the decoding complexity (defined in section II) of ’ET1’ and ’ET2’ to the decoding complexity of ‘No ET’ under different SNRs, and (b) The max block error rate (BLER) of L = 40 subcodes of ’ET1’, ’ET2’, ’No ET’ and ’Conventional’ under different SNRs.
ered, especially at high or low SNR region. For instance, the decoding complexity reduce to 60% compared to conventional sliding window decoding at low SNR = 2.625dB or high SNR = 2.8dB. Especially, it can be observed that the ET condition of stop-decoding can largely reduce the decoding complexity at low SNR region, according to the comparison of ’ET1’ and ’ET2’. From Fig. 3(b), it can be observed that the proposed ET conditions would lead to negligible SNR loss not more than 0.025dB, across wide range of BLER from 10−1 to 10−3. Therefore, the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed ET conditions is demonstrated, for the decoding complexity is largely reduced and the decoding performance is almost untouched.

REFERENCES
[1] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803– 834, Jan. 2011.
[2] S. Kudekar and K. Kasai, “Spatially coupled codes over the multiple access channel,” in Information Theory Proceedings (ISIT), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 2011, pp. 2816–2820.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, ““Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, 2013.
[4] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, J. Song and Y. Wu, ”Quasi-cyclic spatially coupled LDPC Code for broadcasting,” in IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 187-194, March 2020.
[5] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. VanelliCoralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, 2012.
[6] K. Klaiber, S. Cammerer, L. Schmalen and S. t. Brink, “Avoiding burstlike error patterns in windowed decoding of spatially coupled LDPC codes,” 2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), Hong Kong, 2018, pp. 1-5.
[7] N. Ul Hassan, A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis and D. J. Costello, “Non-uniform window decoding schedules for spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 501-510, Feb. 2017.
[8] J. Frenzel, S. Mu¨ller-Weinfurtner, J. B. Huber and R. R. Mu¨ller, “Comparison of windowed-decoder configurations for spatially coupled LDPC codes under equal-complexity constraints,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12973 (2020).
[9] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Workshop onSignal Processing Systems, 2004. SIPS 2004., Austin, TX, 2004, pp. 107-112.

Moreover, BLER simulations are carried out to compare proposed sliding window decoding and conventional full BP decoding at the same time, where ’Conventional’ in Fig. 3(b) denotes conventional full layer-scheduled BP decoding with decoding complexity I = 256. As is shown in Fig. 3(b), the proposed sliding window decoding would only lead to SNR loss not more than 0.12dB across wide range of BLER from 10−1 to 10−3, while the decoding complexity can be reduced to less than 1/11. Thus, it can be concluded that proposed sliding window decoding has largely-reduced decoding complexity and show excellent decoding performance consistently.

105
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

