Ultra-Low-Latency LDPC Decoding Architecture Using Reweighted Offset Min-Sum Algorithm
Sangbu Yun∗, Dongyun Kam∗, Jeongwon Choe∗, Byeong Yong Kong†, and Youngjoo Lee∗ ∗Department of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang, Korea
†Division of Electrical, Electronic, and Control Engineering, Kongju National University, Cheonan, Korea Email: youngjoo.lee@postech.ac.kr

Abstract—Due to an iterative nature, a low-density paritycheck (LDPC) decoder is associated with a long latency, being a major bottleneck of the baseband processor in wireless communication systems. Based on the practical min-sum (MS) decoding method, in this paper, we present a cost-effective algorithm for reducing the processing latency of LDPC decoders. By checking the number of short-length cycles in the LDPC code structure, the proposed method dynamically changes the reweighting factor at the iterative operations, successfully reducing the average number of iterations. In addition, we present several optimization schemes to mitigate the hardware overheads resulting from the proposed reweighting scheme. In a 65-nm CMOS process, a prototype IEEE 802.11ay LDPC decoder optimized by the proposed schemes reduces the decoding latency by 1.7 times with negligible overheads compared with the contemporary designs.
Index Terms—Error-correction code, LDPC decoding, Lowlatency processing, Wireless communications
I. INTRODUCTION
The next-generation wireless communications such as the 5G and IEEE 802.11ay have demanded an ultra-low latency to accommodate the real-time massive connectivity [1]–[3]. Among numerous operations performed in the baseband, the iterative decoding procedure for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes has been a major bottleneck that elongates the overall latency. As the LDPC codes have been stipulated in various commercialized protocols by virtue of their promising performances [4], [5], reducing the latency of the decoding procedure is of great urgency to facilitate the dissemination of such forthcoming wireless solutions.
While considerable attention has been paid to the design of high-throughput and low-complexity LDPC decoders [6]–[10], latency-aware design methodologies have not matured enough to satisfy the requirement of the aforementioned standards. To diminish the latency, accordingly, we present a hardwarefriendly reweighting method that can be easily applied to the practical min-sum (MS) decoding. More specifically, when the check and variable nodes are associated with shortlength cycles that degrade the performance [11], the messages calculated at such nodes are conditionally reweighted to suppress the unreliable information. To make such a lowlatency LDPC decoder cost-effective as well, we introduce several optimization methods for the proposed reweighted
This work was supported in part by the National Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIT) (2018R1A4A1025679, 2019R1F1A1060767).

Fig. 1. Bipartite graph representing the BP decoding of LDPC codes.
offset MS (ROMS) algorithm that can reduce the size of lookup table (LUT) and the number of multipliers. As a result, the proposed scheme converges faster than the existing ones by iterating fewer, diminishing the latency. Targeting the latest IEEE 802.11ay specification [12], a prototype decoder realized in a 65-nm CMOS process reveals that our hardware-friendly algorithm curtails the decoding latency by a factor of 1.7 without increasing the hardware complexity compared with the existing designs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the relevant works, and Section III presents the proposed ROMS method. Simulation and implementation results are analyzed and compared with the previous works in Section IV. Concluding remarks are made in Section V.
II. PREVIOUS WORKS
A. Low-Latency LDPC Decoding for BP Algorithm
An (N, K) LDPC codeword is defined to protect K-bit user data by appending parity data of M (= N − K) bits [13]. Fig. 1 shows the bipartite graph representing the structure of an LDPC code, where VNn and CNm denote the nth variable node and the mth check node, respectively. An iterative message-passing method that repeatedly exchanges the reliability information between the two types of nodes has been prevalently adopted in the LDPC decoding [14]. As denoted in Fig. 1, αn,m is the message from VNn to CNm, and βm,n is the one from CNm to VNn. V (m) (C(n)) is the set of variable (check) nodes connected to CNm (VNn).
Algorithm 1 shows a low-latency LDPC decoding method called variable factor appearance probability (VFAP) BP algorithm [15], which provides a promising error-correcting power by resorting to complicated nonlinear operations. More

978-1-7281-33A2u0t-h1o/2ri0z/e$d3l1ic.0e0ns©ed20u2s0e IliEmEitEed to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1: The VFAP-BP Algorithm [15]

Step 1: Initialize all the αn,m values with γn

Step 2: Update βm,n (CNP)

βm,n = 2 tanh−1

n

∈V (m)\n

tanh

α
nm
2

Step 3: Update αn,m (VNP)

αn,m = γn + m ∈C(n)\m ρm βm ,n

−(1 − ρm) βm,n

Step 4: Get the current decision ˆx = [xˆ0, xˆ1, ..., xˆN−1]

xˆn = 1, if γn + m∈C(n) ρmβm,n > 0

xˆn = 0, otherwise Step 5: Terminate if HˆxT = 0 or Imax reached

Step 6: Go back to Step 2

specifically, the algorithm first initializes αn,m with the loglikelihood ratio (LLR) of the mth received bit, γn. Subsequently, each CNm calculates βm,n by handling the messages from V (m). Then, VNs update αn,m. Let CNP and VNP denote such CN’s processing and VN’s processing, respectively.

As shown in Step 4, each VN also computes a posteriori

probability (APP) by collecting all the messages from C(n).

Based on the APPs, we compute the syndromes with the

parity-check matrix H for checking the validity of the current

results, and repeat the CNP and VNP until we find the valid

codeword or reach the maximum number of iterations Imax.

Note that the VFAP-BP algorithm introduces the reweight-

ing factor ρm that is dynamically applied to each βm,n to

reduce the amount of transferred message when the corre-

sponding CN is related to the short cycles including the

overconfident information. To determine ρm, the algorithm first counts sm, the number of girths connected to each CN

[16]. CNm can be either constructive or destructive by setting a threshold tCN. For the constructive CNm with sm < tCN, ρm is simply set to 1, not to affect the original BP decoding

procedure. Otherwise, we degrade the messages from the

destructive CNs by setting ρm = 2/

1 0

v(x)

dx,

where

v(x)

is the degree distribution of VNs [17]. The previous VFAP-

BP algorithm can successfully lower the average number of

iterations by selectively suppressing the effects by destructive

CNs. However, it cannot be directly applied to the practical

LDPC decoders for the low-latency next-generation commu-

nications, as the CNP in Algorithm 1 includes the nonlinear

operator that induces an impractical hardware complexity.

B. Practical LDPC Decoders
Considering the computational complexity, the MS-based algorithms have been widely employed in the practical LDPC decoder designs [18]. The nonlinear operator in the CNP of the original BP decoding is substituted with the minimum function. As the outcome of the minimum function tends to be overestimated than that of the original operation, the offsetMS (OMS) [19] and the normalized-MS (NMS) algorithms [19] respectively subtracts and multiplies a predefined value for compensation. In addition, the concept of layered decoding has been actively applied for reducing the effective number of

iterations as well as the memory overheads [7]. However, the recent MS-based algorithms still show considerable decoding latencies as they also suffer from the overconfident messages caused by the short cycles. In this work, for the practical ultralow-latency LDPC decoding, we apply the previous reweighting method to the layered OMS algorithm.

III. PROPOSED REWEIGHTED-OMS ALGORITHM
A. Naive Approach
The previous reweighting scheme developed for the BP algorithm [15] can be directly applied to the OMS decoding scheme by simply changing Step 2 of Algorithm 1 as





βm,n = 

sgn(αn ,m)

n ∈V (m)\n

× max min (|αn ,m|) − δ, 0 , (1)
n ∈V (m)\n

where δ is the predefined offset to compensate for the overestimation of approximate messages [19]. However, this naive approach (ROMSN) incurs an excessive hardware complexity due to the reweighting operations in Step 3 and Step 4 of Algorithm 1. More specifically, compared with the recent decoders for supporting the original OMS algorithm [18], we need two additional multipliers per check-to-variable message, each of which is to calculate ρmβm,n or (1 − ρm)βm,n. In addition, we require an extra LUT to store M bits to indicate whether the source of βm,n is destructive or not.

B. Basic ROMS Algorithm

Compared with VFAP-BP and ROMSN decoding schemes,

to make the architecture area-efficient, the basic version of the

proposed ROMS method (ROMSB) conceptually changes the

counting direction for categorizing constructive and destructive

nodes. More specifically, we count the number of short cycles

connected through VN instead of CN, and determines the

characteristic of each VN. The count for VNn, ln, is now

compared with the new threshold tVN to determine whether

VNs are either constructive or destructive. Similarly to the

VFAP-BP algorithm, αn,m is multiplied by µn only if the

source VN is destructive. To obtain the same decoding results

as ROMSN, as proven in [15], the reweighting factor is then

calculated

as

µn

=

2N/M

1 0

ν

(x)

dx,

where

ν(x)

is

the

degree distribution of CNs.

Based on the newly defined µn, Algorithm 2 depicts the

proposed ROMSB method, which applies the previous low-

latency scheme to the practical OMS LDPC decoder. Note that

we need only one multiplier per message for the reweighting

operation in Step 2 to compute µnαn,m, reducing the compu-

tational complexity. As the reweighting factor is now applied

to the variable-to-check messages, however, it is required to

store the positions of destructive VNs into an extra LUT,

increasing the size of the LUT from M to N when compared

with ROMSN. Therefore, the hardware overheads for realizing

ROMSB are still considerable even though the algorithm can

achieve a lower decoding latency with fewer multiplications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 2: The basic ROMS Algorithm
Step 1: Initialize all the αn,m values with γn Step 2: Update βm,n (CNP)
βm,n = n ∈V (m)\n sgn(αn ,m)
× max min(µn|αn ,m|) − δ, 0 Step 3: Update αn,m (VNP)
αn,m = λn + m ∈C(n)\m βm ,n Step 4: Get the current decision xˆ = [xˆ0, xˆ1, ..., xˆN−1]
xˆn = 1, if γn + m∈C(n) βm,n > 0 xˆn = 0, otherwise Step 5: Terminate if HxˆT = 0 or Imax reached Step 6: Go back to Step 2

C. Area-Optimized ROMS Algorithm
For the area-efficient and low-latency LDPC decoding, we introduce two aggressive optimization schemes that reduce both the number of additional multipliers and the size of the extra LUT without increasing the latency of ROMSB. The first one, ROMSO1, reorganizes the position of multiplication, further reducing the number of multipliers for reweighting operations. More precisely, the ROMSO1 modifies the CNP of Step 2 in Algorithm 2 as





βm,n = 

sgn(αn ,m)

n ∈V (m)\n

× µn max min (|αn ,m|) − δ, 0 . (2)
n ∈V (m)\n
Note that the reweighting operation is now applied only to the selected αn,m of the minimum function. As the minimum function at the CNP handles different inputs, we may observe a slight degradation of the error-correcting performance. Compared with ROMSB that utilizes additional multipliers for all the input messages at the CNP, however, ROMSO1 requires only one multiplier per each CNP, significantly reducing the number of multiplications.
In ROMSO1, we still keep an N -bit LUT to designate if the selected message from the minimum function is from the destructive VN or not. To reduce the LUT size, in the area-optimized ROMSO2 scheme, we store only M bits in the LUT analogously to ROMSN, describing the activation of each reweighting operation in CN-level instead of VN-level. Note that, while we still use the same CNP in (2), multiplying µn is always performed without checking the source VN of the minimum message αn,m when the corresponding CN is considered as the destructive node. As we calculate µn from the short-cycle connections through VNs, the way for determining the destructive CNs in ROMSN is no longer available. In the proposed ROMSN, for each CNm, we count the numbers of connected constructive and destructive VNs, cn and dn, respectively. Then, CNm is considered as the destructive CN if dn > 2cn, which means that the connected VNs are usually destructive to transfer the overconfident

TABLE I ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FOR DIFFERENT ROMS ALGORITHMS

Algorithm ROMSN ROMSB ROMSO1 ROMSO2

LUT size (bits) M N N M

# of multiplications 2 × N × DVN M × DCN M M

messages. As a result, the proposed ROMSO2 requires only M bits to describe the activation condition of the reweighting operation, remarkably saving the overall decoder complexity. Even if we perform the reweighting operation on the messages from the constructive VNs, the simulation results show that the performance degradation is negligible. Table I depicts how the proposed optimization steps gradually reduce the hardware overheads for applying the reweighting operations on the practical OMS algorithm. Note that DCN and DVN are the average degrees of CN and VN, respectively. As tabulated, the fullyoptimized version, i.e., ROMSO2, successfully minimizes the extra hardware compared with the other approaches, leading to the cost-effective low-latency decoder architecture.
IV. SIMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
A. Algorithm-Level Performance
To confirm the algorithm-level advantages of the proposed reweighting schemes, in terms of the error-correcting performance as well as the required number of iterations, we simulated five different decoding methods including the MS, OMS, ROMSB, ROMSO1, and ROMSO2 algorithms. During the simulation, we used two LDPC codes for the practical wireless communications, i.e., a a (648, 540) code from IEEE 802.11n [20] and (672, 504) code from IEEE 802.11ay [12], where the frame-error rate (FER) performances of two LDPC codes are illustrated in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(b), respectively. For these FER simulations, the maximum number of iterations IMAX was equally set to 10, and the offset value δ was selected to be 0.125. Considering the practical decoder realization, in addition, we adopted the layered decoding processing where the internal computing steps are based on the 8-bit fixedpoint numbers [19]. Note that the proposed ROMS algorithms achieve better FER performances than the previous methods. Even if the optimization schemes for reducing the hardware overheads sometimes conduct the reweighting operations incorrectly, we can still achieve such attractive error-correcting performances.
For the case of IEEE 802.11ay system, Fig. 3 analyzes the achievable FER performance depending on the number of iterations when Eb/N0 = 3.9 dB. As the proposed work alleviates the overconfident effects caused by the short cycles, the number of iterations to achieve the similar FER performance can be significantly reduced, leading to the ultralow-latency LDPC decoding. Targeting the FER of 0.001, for example, the proposed ROMSB shortens the decoding latency

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. FER performances with different LDPC decoding algorithms for (a) IEEE 802.11n and (b) IEEE 802.11ay systems.

Fig. 4. Hardware architecture for the prototype LDPC decoder.
TABLE II IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF VARIOUS MS-BASED LDPC DECODERS

Algorithm LDPC code

OMS [21] ROMSN ROMSB ROMSO1 ROMSO2 (672, 504) from IEEE 802.11ay [12]

Technology (nm)

65

Frequency (MHz)

370

Area (mm2)

0.79

0.95 0.83

0.82

0.81

Latency† (ns)

89.6

52.6 52.6

54.1

54.3

Throughput† (Gb/s) 5.62

9.58 9.58

9.31

9.28

†Targeting the FER of 0.001.

Fig. 3. The achievable FER depending on the number of iterations.
by 1.7 times over the conventional OMS algorithm. Moreover, ROMSO1 and ROMSO2 require almost the same iterations in achieving the same FER performance, minimizing the hardware overheads without increasing the decoding latency.
B. Prototype Design
To quantitatively evaluate the hardware overheads from the proposed decoding algorithm, we also implemented prototype LPDC decoders for IEEE 802.11ay systems in a 65-nm CMOS technology. Fig. 4 depicts the hardware architecture of the prototype LDPC decoder, which consists of 42-parallel processing elements (PEs), shuffle/de-shuffle networks, APP/beta on-chip memories, and the extra LUT. Note that a PE performs CNP and VNP that apply the layered ROMS decoding algorithm. Compared with the recent design [21], the proposed architecture utilizes two additional hardware units colored red in Fig. 4, i.e., the extra LUT for storing the indicators of reweighting operations and the multiplier inside each PE. In addition, we slightly modify the reweighting factor µn so that the multiplier for the reweighting operation can be replaced by the area-efficient shift-and-add operation [22]. More precisely, the original µn is 0.631 by considering the degree distribution

function, whereas µn = 0.625 is applied to the prototype decoder by allowing the negligible FER degradation.
Table II summarizes the implementation results of the prototype designs adopting different MS-based LDPC decoding algorithms. Note that ROMSN significantly increases the overall decoder complexity as it requires a lot of multipliers required for the reweighting operations. By changing the reweighting direction, ROMSB greatly reduces the area overheads while implementing the lowest decoding latency. With the hardwarefriendly optimization schemes, the fully-optimized ROMSO2 minimizes the additional complexity, still leading to the lowlatency LDPC decoding compared with the conventional OMS decoder. As a result, the proposed schemes successfully provide the practical low-latency LDPC decoder for the nextgeneration wireless communications.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented an advanced LDPC decoding scheme that reduces the decoding latency without increasing the hardware complexity. The proposed reweighting method dynamically relaxes the overconfident messages at the previous OMS algorithm when the destructive source nodes are detected. Implementation results have shown that the proposed hardwarefriendly optimization schemes shorten the decoding latency by 1.7 times compared with the previous architectures, leading to the ultra-low-latency solution for the IEEE 802.11ay standard.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Sachs, G. Wikstrom, T. Dudda, R. Baldemair, and K. Kittichokechai, “5G Radio Network Design for Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communication,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 24–31, March 2018.
[2] Y. Ghasempour, C. R. da Silva, C. Cordeiro, and E. W. Knightly, “IEEE 802.11 ay: Next-generation 60 GHz communication for 100 Gb/s WiFi,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 186–192, 2017.
[3] A. G. D. Uchoa and R. C. de Lamare, “Coding Techniques for Future Wi-Fi,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01348, 2019.
[4] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel codes: Classical and modern. Cambridge university press, 2009.
[5] E. Perahia and R. Stacey, Next generation wireless LANs: 802.11 n and 802.11 ac. Cambridge university press, 2013.
[6] S. Kim, G. E. Sobelman, and H. Lee, “A Reduced-Complexity Architecture for LDPC Layered Decoding Schemes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1099–1103, June 2011.
[7] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, August 2009.
[8] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, W. Wang, and M. Yeary, “Multi-Rate Layered Decoder Architecture for Block LDPC Codes of the IEEE 802.11n Wireless Standard,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2007, pp. 1645–1648.
[9] H.-C. Lee, M.-R. Li, J.-K. Hu, P.-C. Chou, and Y.-L. Ueng, “Optimization techniques for the efficient implementation of high-rate layered QC-LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 457–470, 2016.
[10] S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, “High-throughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques & dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421–1430, 2015.
[11] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “A new class of upper bounds on the log partition function,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2313–2335, 2005.
[12] IEEE Standard for Information technology-Telecommunications and information exchange between systems-Local and metropolitan area networks-Specific requirements-Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications Amendment 3: Enhancements for Very High Throughput in the 60 GHz Band, IEEE Std 802.11ad-2012, 28 December 2012.
[13] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[14] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, H.-A. Loeliger et al., “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, 2001.
[15] J. Liu and R. C. de Lamare, “Low-latency reweighted belief propagation decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1660–1663, 2012.
[16] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “An algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 287–292, 2005.
[17] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Constraining LDPC degree distributions for improved error floor performance,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 103–105, 2006.
[18] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Min-sum decoder architectures with reduced word length for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 105–115, 2009.
[19] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, 2005.
[20] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and information exchange between systems–Local and metropolitan area networks-Specific requirements –Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications.
[21] C. Roth, P. Meinerzhagen, C. Studer, and A. Burg, “A 15.8 pJ/bit/iter quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.11 n in 90 nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (ASSCC). IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–4.
[22] K. Johansson, O. Gustafsson, and L. S. DeBrunner, “Estimation of the switching activity in shift-and-add based computations,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2009, pp. 3054–3057.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:23:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

