2020 12th International Congress on Ultra Modern Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT)

On the performance slope of short LDPC codes
*

Luiza R. Medova Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Institute for Information Transmission Problems,
Russian Academy of Science Moscow, Russia
luiza.medova@phystech.edu

Pavel S. Rybin Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia p.rybin@skoltech.ru

Igor E. Sidorenko JSC ”Russian Space Systems”
Moscow, Russia tsidorenko@mail.ru

Abstract—The present work is a continuation of the previous study [1] on the performance of short LDPC codes. We have examined a sample of (128,256) different LDPC codes and explored their bit error-rate curves as a function of Tanner graph properties. It was found that certain graph characteristics correlate with LDPC code performance and can help to distinguish LDPC codes with a good decoding threshold (less or equal 3.5 dB) from others. In this work, we investigate a slope of bit errorrate curves that along with a decoding threshold provides an information on code performance.
Index Terms—Low-density parity check codes(LDPC), Tanner graph, algebraic connectivity, graph centrality, graph centralization, betweenness centrality, closeness centrality, eigenvector centrality, degree centrality, prediction of the LDPC codes performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
The low-density parity-check (LDPC) [2] codes are a class of linear block codes, constructed from a sparse bipartite Tanner graph [3]. Decoding of LDPC codes is achieved using the belief propagation algorithm [4] that passes messages along the edges of the bipartite graph. Many studies have been devoted to the characterization of the LDPC code performance and the construction of finite length codes that have good performance. The performance of the LDPC decoding is determined by particular edge connections and topological properties of the Tanner graph [5], [6].
Centrality measures are an important tool that helps to understand in what way messages passed through the network. These measures use graph theory to calculate the importance of any given node in a network. Several centrality measures have been created but the most commonly used are degree centrality, eigenvector centrality, closeness centrality and betweenness centrality [7]. However, as stated above, centralities measures assess the influence of a node in the entire network. Centralities definitions cannot possibly give a picture of a graph in general. In [8] L. Freeman introduced a definition of graph centralization. The graph centralization provides an assessment to what extent the graph structure is centralized. It determines the relative significance of vertices in the graph.
Centrality measures found application in the information and coding theory. In particular, they can be used for the LDPC

codes construction. For example, in the work [9] authors proposed a new PEG algorithm that calculates the centralities of single nodes. In many modern practical applications QuasiCyclic (QC) LDPC codes are extensively used since they have a low encoding complexity and high speed decoding. The main feature of QC-LDPC codes is that their parity check matrix are composed of square circulant submatrices. QCLDPC codes are constructed using shift values of circulants that are defined using different algorithms. In that work we used ACE method ([10],[11]) to select appropriate shift values. However, it is a complicated task to check all possible combinations of shifts of circulant submatrices. Besides, it is significant to find some characteristics of LDPC codes that can help to understand their error correction performance without the requirement of additional simulation.
Since a parity check matrix of LDPC codes can be associated with a bipartite graph, in our work we paid attention to some topological features of LDPC graphs. In our previous work [1] we explored the dependence of iterative decoding threshold on different graph centralization measures. We built the polynomial regression model and it turns out that it can predict the LDPC decoding threshold. However, the question of behavior further error curve behavior remains open. Therefore, in that work we explored the slope of the error-rate curve.
II. TANNER GRAPH PROPERTIES
A. LDPC codes
LDPC codes are as a special case of linear block codes. They are characterized by a parity check matrix H that contains mainly zeros and a relatively small number of ones. A linear block code can be can be graphically represented by a Tanner graph. A Tanner graph is a bipartite graph that consists of two sets of nodes: the variable nodes and the check nodes. Variable nodes represent bits equations and correspond to columns of a parity check matrix. Accordingly, check nodes represent check equations and correspond to rows of a parity check matrix. Edges in a Tanner graph connect variable nodes to check nodes and represent the nonzero entries in a parity check matrix. For example, fig.1 shows the Tanner graph representation of a (6,4) LDPC code.
A Tanner graph can be presented by means of an adja-

978-1-7281-9281-9/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

67

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:17:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of the observed sum of differences to its maximum value, it varies from 0 to 1. CX = 0 if and only if all values of CX (pk) are equal.

Fig. 1. The bipartite Tanner graph of an LDPC codes

cency matrix A [12]. An adjacency matrix A = (Ai,j) is a square matrix elements of which indicate whether pairs of nodes are adjacent or not in the graph:

1, if there is an edge between nodes i and j. Ai,j := 0, otherwise.

The adjacency matrix A = (Ai,j) of a Tanner graph can be written in the following form:

0H

A = HT 0 .

(1)

Let H be a parity check matrix of size r × n. Then, an appropriate adjacency matrix A for an LDPC code has a size (r + n) × (r + n).

B. Graph centralities

Centrality is a fundamental concept essential for the analysis of complex networks. Measures of centrality identify the most important vertices within a graph relying only on its structure. The idea of the graph centrality was first developed by A. Bavelas in 1948 [13]. As a definition of the importance of a node, A. Bavelas suggested considering its distance to all other nodes in the graph. L.C. Freeman described three basic measures of nodes importance, namely degree centrality, closeness centrality, and betweenness centrality ([14], [8]). Different centrality measures emphasize different topological properties of the graph 2.
In addition to identifying the centrality of single nodes, which is a local centrality metric in a graph, Freeman defined an overall centralization of a graph. That measure was defined as the average difference between the normalized centrality of the most central node and the normalized centralities of all other nodes in the graph. Let’s define:

n
max (CX (p∗) − CX (pi))−
i=1

- the largest sum of all possible differences of centrality values in a graph with n nodes. The overall graph centralization is determined by the following equation:

CX

=

max

n i=1

(CX

(p∗)

−

CX

(pi))

n i=1

(CX

(p∗)

−

CX

(pi))

(2)

The value CX defines the degree to which CX (p∗) surpasses the centrality values of all other nodes. Since CX is the ratio

Fig. 2. An example of a graph and different centrality measures

C. Degree centrality

The simplest measure of centrality is degree centrality. The

idea of that measure is based on the assumption that a node

is important and influential if it has many neighbors [8]. That

is, degree centrality of a node i is the total number of edges

connected it:

n

CD(vi) = a(i, j),

(3)

j=1

contains one central node to which all other nodes are con-

nected (a star graph), The maximum value of degree centrality

is achieved when a graph is a star: it contains one central

node to which all other nodes are connected. The value of degree centrality CD(v∗) for a central node is (n − 1), and the centralities CD(p) for the remaining nodes are equal to 1.

The overall degree centralization:

CD(G) =

n i=1

|CD

(p∗

)

−

CD

(p)|

n2 − 3n + 2

(4)

Degree centrality is a local centrality measure that does not take into account the rest of the graph. Hence, highly connected nodes are not necessarily the center of the graph. However, it is important to take into account the node’s influence on indirect relationships.

D. Eigenvector centrality

The eigenvector centrality continues the concept of the de-

gree centrality [15]. Degree centrality performs a simple count

of the number of connections a node has, while eigenvector

centrality takes into account the influence of the adjacent

nodes. A node with a small number of edges can have a very

high eigenvector centrality value if its adjacent nodes are well

connected to the whole graph. Let M (i) be the set of nodes adjacent to the node i. Then

eigenvector centrality can be defined as follows:

1

Ce(i) = λ

Ce(j).

(5)

j∈M (i)

68
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:17:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Let Ce be a vector that has an estimation for the centrality of the node i in its ith component. Then the equation 5 can be
rewritten using the adjacency matrix A(G):

λCe = ACe

(6)

Since the centrality values must be non-negative, λ is determined as the largest eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix. Accordingly, Ce is the corresponding eigenvector. The equation 5 takes the following form:

1n

Ce(i) = λmax i=1 aij Ce(j),

(7)

E. Closeness centrality

Another view of the centrality of a node is based on its

closeness to other nodes in the graph. In the work [16] it

was assumed that the message outgoing from the most central

node will propagate throughout the graph in the shortest time.

To determine this metric, the concept of a geodesic distance

between two nodes is introduced as the length of the shortest

path connecting these nodes. Let d(i, j) be equal to the shortest

distance between the vertice nodes vi and vj. The closeness of the node vi is defined as the reciprocal of the sum of the geodesic distance between the node vi and all other nodes in

the graph:

1

CC (i) =

n j=1

d(i,

j)

,

The overall closeness graph centralization:

CC =

n i=1

|CC

(n2 − 3n

(p∗) − CC (pi)| + 2)/(2n − 3)

.

The assumption of the closeness centrality is that nodes that are important have the shortest distances to all other nodes.

F. Betweenness centrality

The betweenness centrality is based on the number of

geodesic paths going through a node. The betweenness cen-

trality can be defined in terms of probability theory. Let gij

be the number of geodesic paths between the nodes vi and vj

and the probability of choosing one of the paths is equal to

1 gij

.

If

gij (pk)

is

the

number

of

geodesic

paths

between

the

nodes

vi

and

vj

through

the

node

pk ,

then

bij (pk)

=

gij (pk) gij

- is the probability that the node pk lies on the path between

the nodes vi and vj. vertices:

n
CB(vk) = bij (vk)
i<j

The equation for the overall betwenness centralizaion was

derived in the work [14]:

CB =

n i=1

|CB

(v∗)

−

CB

(vi)|

n3 − 4n2 + 5n − 2

Thus, the more information passes through a node, the greater impact that node would have over the graph. In terms of the betweenness centrality that node is the most influential.

G. Algebraic connectivity
Let G(V, E) be a graph with vertex set V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn}. Let d(vi) be the degree of the node vi ∈ V (G), (i = 1, 2, . . . , vn). Let’s define the matrix D = D(G):

Di,j =

deg(vi), 0,

if i = j. otherwise.

Kirchhoff’s matrix (or Laplace’s matrix) is the matrix K(G) = D(G) − A(G), where A(G) is the adjacency matrix of the graph. The degrees of the nodes are found on the main diagonal of the Kirchhoff’s matrix. At the intersection of the ith row and the jth column there is -1 if the nodes vi and vj are adjacent and 0 otherwise:

 deg(vi),  Ki,j = −1,
0,

if i = j. if vertices vi and vj are adjacent otherwise.

The figure 3 shows an example of a graph and its Kirchhoff matrix. Let λi be the eigenvalues of the Kirchhoff matrix:

 2 −1 0 −1

K

=

  

1 0

2 0

0 −1 1 −1

−1 −1 −1 3

Fig. 3.

λn ≥ λn−1 ≥ · · · ≥ λ2 ≥ λ1 = 0,
The spectrum of the Kirchhof matrix is of great importance in many areas such as topological structures and dynamical processes ([17], [18]). The second smallest eigenvalue λ2 characterizes the algebraic connectivity of the graph and can be applied for the performance analysis of LDPC codes under iterative, message-passing decoding algorithms.

III. THE PREDICTION OF THE LDPC CODE PERFORMANCE

In the work [1] we have explored the dependence of

iterative decoding threshold on structural graph properties.

The point on the LDPC performance curve corresponding to

the BER = 10−3 was chosen as the decoding threshold. The

observable variable in the predictive regression model was

the

Eb N0

ratio

corresponding

to

the

given

error

probability.

It

has been revealed that values of an algebraic connectivity

and centrality measures are associated with the LDPC codes

error correction characteristics. The discovered relationship

has been used to identify the LDPC codes with a good or

bad decoding threshold. We have continued our research on

the prediction of the LDPC code performance.

69
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:17:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algebraic connectivity
degree centrality closeness centrality betweenness centrality eigenvector centrality

algebraic connectivity
1
-0.03
-0.5
-0.65
-0.71

degree centrality
-0.03

closeness centrality -0.5

1

0.45

0.45

1

0.46

0.44

0.56

0.53

TABLE I CORRELATION MATRIX

betweeness centrality
-0.65
0.46
0.44
1
0.97

eigenvector centrality
-0.71
0.56
0.53
0.97
1

Fig. 4. BER performance of LDPC codes and predicted curve slopes

A. Regression model building

B. The slope of the error-rate curve

The performance of LDPC codes was investigated as a function of the topological properties of the Tanner graph. Using simulation system on a FPGA we have obtained bit error rate curves for 2500 LDPC codes up to BER = 10−8.
Centrality measures and algebraic connectivity were calculated for Tanner graphs of appropriate LDPC codes. The table I shows the correlation between the calculated metrics. As the table I shows, there is a strong correlation (0.97) between the indicators of eigenvector centrality and the betweenness centrality. Eigenvector centrality is also significantly correlated with algebraic connectivity (-0.71). Therefore, this metric was not used to build regression models.

We have calculated the slopes of the obtained BER curves, the values of which ranged between -4.39 to -0.732. The second-order polynomial regression was constructed to estimate the curve slope. To assess the quality of the polynomial model, a 5-fold cross-validation was used. The data set was equally divided into 5 parts. A randomly selected subsample surved as the validation data for testing the model. Other subsamples were used for training a model. That process was repeated 5 times, and each of the 5 subsamples was used exactly one time for model validation. For each partition, root-mean-square error (RMSE) and the coefficient of determination (R2) were calculated. The results were averaged to

70
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:17:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5. BER performance of LDPC codes and predicted curve slopes

produce a single estimation:
RM SE = 0, 22 ± 0, 01 dB,
R2 = 0, 84 ± 0, 01.
Figures 4 and 5 presents the BER performance of LDPC codes from the control sample and mark the slopes of the curves predicted by the regression model.
CONCLUSION
In developing our previous work on the prediction of the decoding threshold, we have also obtained the evaluation method for the curve slope based on the algebraic properties of Tanner graph. These methods can be used to construct the protographs of LDPC codes with desired correcting characteristics under iterative decoding based on belief propagation. Meanwhile, the approach presented in this work avoids constructions of LDPC codes with a bad decoding threshold but the slow slope of the error rate which is particularly important short-length LDPC codes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The reported study was supported by Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, contract No.03.G25.31.0222 and RFBR, research projects No. 18-0701409, No. 19-01-00364.

REFERENCES
[1] L. R. Medova, P. S. Rybin, and I. V. Filatov, “On the performance analysis of short ldpc codes,” in 2019 XVI International Symposium ”Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems” (REDUNDANCY), 2019, pp. 18–22.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28,, 1962.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[4] R. U. T. Richardson, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message- passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, 2001.
[5] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, “Analysis and design of moderate length regular ldpc codes with low error floors,” in 2006 40th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, 2006, pp. 823–828.
[6] J. M. F. Moura, Jin Lu, and Haotian Zhang, “Structured low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 42–55, 2004.
[7] S. Borgatti, “Centrality and network flow,” Social Networks, 27, 55-71., 2005.
[8] L. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification,” Social networks, pp. 215-239, 1979.
[9] K. S. Insah Bhurtah, P. C. Catherine, “A peg construction

71
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:17:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of ldpc codes based on the betweenness centrality metric,” Advances in Electrical and Computer Engineerin, pp. 85-92, 2016. [10] Tao Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular ldpc code construction,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, 2004. [11] A. D. D. Vukobratovic´, “Ace spectrum of ldpc codes and generalized ace design,” Proc. IEEE ICC, pp. 665– 670., 2007. [12] N. Biggs, “Algebraic graph theory,” Cambridge Mathematical Library (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, Definition 2.1, p. 7., 1993. [13] A. Bavelas, “A mathematical model for small group structures,” Human Organization, 7:16–30, 1948. [14] F. L.C., “A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness,” Sociometry 40:35-41., 1977. [15] M. E. J. Newman, “The mathematics of networks,” In: Palgrave Macmillan (eds) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2008. [16] B. A., “Communication patterns in task-oriented groups,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 22, 725730, 1950. [17] F. R. K. Chung, “Lectures on spectral graph theory,” American Methematical Society, 1997. [18] B. Mohar, “The laplacian spectrum of graphs,” Graph Theory, Combinatorics, and Applications, vol. 2,pp. 871–898., 1991.
72
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:17:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

