2020 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) | 978-1-7281-5784-9/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/BMSB49480.2020.9379440

Polar Decoding with Schedule Diversity Based on LDPC-like Sparse Graphs

Yen-Ming Chen∗, Yong-Jan Yang∗, Bo-Lun Huang∗, Huang-Chang Lee†, and Chih-Peng Li∗ ∗Institute of Communications Engineering, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
Email: emerychen.cm@gmail.com; yong0745@gmail.com; imahero1217@gmail.com; cpli@faculty.nsysu.edu.tw †Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan
Email: akula.lee@gmail.com
This work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan under grant MOST 108-2218-E-110-014.

Abstract—In this paper, based on the technique of LDPC (lowdensity parity-check)-like sparse graphs for the Polar codes, we propose a Polar decoding method which provides the schedule diversity. The investigated decoding schedules outperforms Arıkan’s belief propagation (BP) algorithm performed on the original encoding factor graph. Secondly, based on both the layered BP (LBP) and the modified node-wise residual BP (NW-RBP) schedules, we are able produce several sequential decoding schedules that are executed in serial. It is shown through simulations that when compared to the successive cancellation list (SCL) decoding, the proposed scheme achieves a lower complexity level, while a gap of 0.2 dB still exists in BER performance in the highSNR region. However, the enhanced BP-based decoding method provides a flexible decoding latency, and is able to generate softin/soft-out information, which makes it suitable for the schemes which perform iterative decoding and detection processes.
Index Terms—Channel coding, advanced signal processing for transmission, Polar code, decoding schedule, schedule diversity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Polar codes [1], which are theoretically proved to achieve the channel capacity when considering an infinite code length under the successive cancellation (SC) decoding strategy, have been recently adopted to the 5G standard for the uplink control channel of the enhanced mobile broad band scenario (eMBB) scenario [2]. However, Polar codes that have finite code lengths suffer from poor error-rate performance when considering the SC decoding. Consequently, a successive cancellation list (SCL) decoder was proposed to achieve the maximum likelihood (ML) bound [3]. One major drawback of SC and SCL decoding is the long decoding latency due to its serial decoding nature, which reduces the throughput of the receiver. In addition, the SCL decoder requires a higher computation and storage complexity, and does not provide soft-in/soft-out information. Consequently, the SCL decoder is not suitable for schemes which perform the iterative decoding and detection process. In contrast, a belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm based on [4] was proposed in [5]. The BP decoder does not suffer from the above-mentioned drawbacks, and is a good candidate for high-throughput demanding applications. However, the BP decoder achieves an inferior error performance when compared to that of the SCL decoding algorithm.
The BP decoder reported in [5] is performed over a factor graph which corresponds to the generator matrix. In contrast,

a factor graph which corresponds to the parity-check matrix is dense (i.e., non-sparse) and contains many short cycles [6]. Consequently, the conventional BP algorithm, which is used for the low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding, fails on the dense graph which corresponds to the parity-check matrix of a Polar code. To allow iterative decoding over a paritycheck matrix, a graph pruning method have been reported in [7]. In addition, a novel approach, which aims at finding a parity-check-like sparse matrix of a corresponding LDPC code suitable for iterative decoding, is reported in [8] and based on the pruning the redundant variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs). Consequently, BP-based algorithms can be performed by regarding Polar codes as LDPC-like codes.
On the other hand, to accelerate the convergence speed of LDPC decoding, various schedules have be adopted in previous literature. Layered BP (LBP) [9]-[11] is a sequential schedule (SS) which arranges the decoding process in the order of the rows of the parity-check matrix. In addition, for the residual BP (RBP) [12][13], the edge message which yields the maximum check-to-variable (C2V) residual will be updated first. In order to achieve an enhanced convergence performance, node-wise RBP (NW-RBP), which not only updates the message which yields the maximum C2V residual, but also all the messages generated by the same check node, was also proposed in [14] and [15]. It is also observed that when considering a limited iteration value, for a single received LDPC codeword, the values of the soft messages exchanged using different schedules will not be exactly equal, and diverse decoding results can be obtained.
Recently, it is observed in [16] that the performance of iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding of Polar codes can be enhanced by decoding over different carefully chosen factor graph realizations. This phenomenon actually implies that the order of the message updates may possibly induce significant impact on the decoding of Polar codes. Motivated by the aforementioned results, in this paper, we first investigate the dynamic modified NW-RBP schedule that is suitable for Polar decoding on the LDPC-like sparse graphs. In addition, a decoding strategy which utilizes the Schedule Diversity[11], is further devised for the Polar decoding based on the LDPC-like sparse graphs. It is shown through simulations that applying the decoding schedules on the LDPC-like sparse graph is able to

978-1-7281-5784-9/19/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

achieve an enhanced error performance when compared to the original Arıkan’s BP which performs on the original encoding factor graph. Comparing to the SCL which consider list sizes of 8 and 32, the devised BP decoding with schedule diversity are able to achieve a lower complexity level in the high SNR region. Although a gap of 0.2 dB can still be observed in the BER performance, the nature of BP-based algorithm is able to provide a flexible decoding latency, and makes it more suitable to cope with the schemes which perform iterative decoding and detection processes.

II. PRELIMINARIES

Polar codes are designed based on the concept of channel polarization, in which N identical channels are combined based on a 2 × 2 kernel. As a result, the N synthesized bit channels show the polarization effect. The k synthesized bit
channels that are able to guarantee the best channel quality are used for the data transmission, while the remaining N − k bit channels are assigned to some frozen bits that are know to both the transmitter and the receiver. The value of frozen bits are set to 0 in this paper. The encoding process is based on the generator matrix G, and a length-N Polar codeword can be generated as x = uG. In addition, systematic encoding can be considered to offer a BER improvement [17].
In [5], Arıkan’s BP decoder is performed on the factor graph representations of the generator matrix G. The original
Polar BP decoder factor graph, which is also referred to as the encoding factor graph, consists of n = log2 N stages. In addition, N · (n + 1) variable nodes (VNs) and N · n check nodes (CNs) can be found in the encoding factor graph [5]. An example of (N, k) = (8, 4) Polar encoding factor graph can be found in Fig. 1.
For the calculation of soft messages, we let mv→c denote the log likelihood ratio (LLR) messages transmitted from a VN v to a CN c. We also let mc→v denote the LLR message transmitted from a CN c to a VN v. The value of mc→v can be computed as





mc→v =

sign (mv′→c)·φ 

φ(|mv′→c|) ,

v′∈N (c)\v

v′∈N (c)\v
(1)

where N (c) is defined as the set of VNs that are the neighbors

of

c,

and

φ(x)

=

φ−1(x)

=

−

log(tanh(

x 2

)).

In

contrast,

the

value of mv→c can be computed as

mv→c = Livni +

mc′→v ,

(2)

c′∈N (v)\c

where N (v) is defined as the set of CNs that are the neighbors

of v. In addition, the Livni value denotes the a priori LLR value

of node v. At the leftmost stage, since the value of frozen bits

are set to 0, Livni is set to infinity when v is a frozen bit. At the rightmost stage, the Livni can be obtained from the channel

outputs. Lastly, for the remaining VNs, these nodes do not

have

any

have

a

priori

information,

and

the

value

of

Lini
v

is

set to 0.

Frozen bits
Fig. 1. An example of encoding factor graph for a (8, 4) Polar code.
When trying to perform the BP decoding on the paritycheck matrix H of the Polar code, it is found in literature that H is a highly dense matrix [6]. Consequently, a decoding failure will be induced when applying the traditional sumproduct algorithm (SPA) decoding on the dense H matrix. To tackle this issue, several pruning techniques are proposed in [7] and [8]. In the encoding factor graph illustrated in Fig. 1, the frozen nodes, the degree-1 CN and its connected VN, and the degree-2 hidden variable nodes can be removed. Furthermore, some of the VNs can also be replaced or combined in this graph. As a result, the encoding factor graph can be eventually simplified to a low-density parity-check (LDPC)-like sparse decoding graph [8]. Benefiting from its low-density property, iterative Polar decoding based on the SPA, which consists of both steps given in (1) and (2), can be conducted on the sparse decoding graph. On the other hand, it is shown in [8] that the error performance of the “LDPC-like BP” provides worse error performance when compared to the original Arıkan’s BP, especially when the code length is large. In addition, the error performance for both BP decoding methods is distant from that of the SCL decoding. For more details of the LDPC-like sparse decoding graph and the related pruning techniques, please refer to [8].
III. PROPOSED BP DECODING WITH SCHEDULE DIVERSITY BASED ON LDPC-LIKE SPARSE GRAPHS A. Modified NW-RBP Algorithm In [16], it is observed that the performance of conventional BP decoding of Polar codes can be further enhanced by decoding over different carefully chosen encoding factor graph realizations. This phenomenon actually implies that the order of the message updates may possibly induce more significant impact on the decoding of Polar codes, when comparing to that on the decoding of conventional LDPC codes. Consequently, this phenomenon inspires us to generalize the decoding schedules for LDPC codes to the decoding of Polar codes. Thanks to the technique of LDPC-like sparse graph, we are able to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10-1 A B C D
10-2

BER

10-3 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5

Check Update Number

105

Fig. 2. Comparisons of the convergence speed for different decoding strategies. (A) Arıkan’s BP; (B) Flooding; (C) LBP; (D) Modified NW-RBP.

easily implement different decoding schedules on the decoding of Polar codes.
In Algorithm 1, a modified NW-RBP algorithm is devised for the decoding schedule of Polar codes, where mpc→ rev is denoted as the value of pre-calculation [13], and the calculation of residual value can be obtained by r(c→v) = |rnew(c→v) − rold(c→v)|. If we let α = 1 for each CN update in Algorithm 1, the modified NW-RBP algorithm always chooses the CN which contains the edge that has the largest residual value for the next update. An iteration of the dynamic NWRBP schedule is complete when the number of check node updates achieves the total number of the check nodes on the LDPC-like sparse graph. Consequently, we can produce a sequential schedule which consider a dynamic order for the check node updates. The modified NW-RBP algorithm will be terminated if all of the CNs are satisfied, or if the maximum iteration number has been achieved. Benefiting from the fast convergence behavior of the decoding schedules, in this paper, we set the maximum iteration number to be 20.
For the demonstration of the error performance, we consider a systematic Polar code which considers a code length of 1024 and an information length of 512 under the AWGN channel. Considering an SNR value of 1.75 dB, in Fig. 2, it is shown that performing different schedules on the LDPC-like sparse graph of the Polar code successfully provides an enhanced performance when compared to the original Arıkan’s BP which performs on the encoding factor graph of the Polar code. It is also observed that not only a faster convergence speed can be obtained, but also a lower converged BER value can be achieved.
B. BP Decoding with Schedule Diversity
The proposed BP decoding algorithm with schedule diversity is reported in Algorithm 2. An LBP decoding schedule is adopted as the first decoding schedule in order to provide a sufficiently different decoding result comparing to other

Algorithm 1 Modified NW-RBP Algorithm
Step 1: Initialize all mc→v = 0, mv→c = Livni. Step 2: Generate all mpc→ rev. Step 3: Set all rnew(c→v) = mcp→ rev, rold(c→v) = 0. Step 4: Compute all residual r(c→v) and find the α-th largest one. Step 5: Set all rold = rnew. Step 6: Let the edge which connects ci and vj has the α-th largest residual value. Step 7:
For every vk ∈ N (ci) do Generate and propagate mci→vk . Set r(ci→vk) = 0. For every ca ∈ N (vk)\ci do Generate and propagate mvk→ca . End For For every cb ∈ N (vk)\ci do For every va ∈ N (cb)\vk do Generate rnew(cb→va) = mcpbr→ e va . End For End For For every cb ∈ N (vk)\ci do For every va ∈ N (cb)\vk do Compute all residual r(cb→va). End For End For Set all rold = rnew.
End For Step 8:
If all of the CNs are satisfied or the maximum iteration number is achieved Break
Else Return to Step 6.
Step 8: Return the decoded results in the last decoder.
schedules. If this decoding attempt is not successful, in the subsequent decoding attempts, the modified NW-RBP algorithm will be performed several times. However, rather than continue choosing the CN which contains the edge that has the largest residual value for each update, we randomly choose the updated CN among the CNs which contain the edges that have the first Γ largest residual values. It is worth mentioning that if more than one of the edges that has the first Γ largest residual values are located in the same CN, we will seek for more CNs in order to ensure that the number of candidates of CNs is retained to Γ in each of the CN updates. Consequently, the α value varies in each CN update. We are able to produce at most Imax − 1 dynamic decoding schedules that approximately follow the indication of the residuals, however, have sufficient divergence in the order of message update.
In the simulation results, we let Imax = 10 and set the Γ value to 5. In Fig. 3, it is shown that in the high-SNR region, the proposed scheme achieves a reduced computational complexity level when compared to those of the SCL decoding algorithms which consider list sizes of 8 and 32. It is shown in Fig. 4 that a decoding algorithm based on the BP decoding is successfully devised to approach the error performance of the SCL decoding. However, considering the current complexity level, the BER performance of the proposed scheme is still

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7 105

10-1

A

A

B

6

C

B C

10-2

D

5

4

10-3

Edge update Number BER

3

10-4

2
10-5 1

0 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3 Eb/N0
Fig. 3. Comparisons of the computational complexity for different decoding strategies. (A) Proposed BP decoding with schedule diversity; (B) SCL when L = 8; (C) SCL when L = 32.

10-6 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3 Eb/N0
Fig. 4. Comparisons of the BER Performance for different decoding strategies. (A) LBP; (B) Proposed BP decoding with schedule diversity (C) SCL when L = 8; (D) SCL when L = 32.

0.2 dB away from those of the SCL decoding which considers L = 8 and 32 (and also, from the ML performance bound) in the high-SNR region. In spite of this, the proposed BPbased decoding strategy can be terminated freely at any time, and hence provides a flexible decoding latency. In addition, the proposed scheme is able to generate the soft-in/soft-out information for all of the code bits, and, hence, is suitable for schemes that perform iterative decoding and detection processes. Lastly, the error performance can be further enhanced if we increase the number of adopted schedules.
Algorithm 2 Proposed BP Decoding with Schedule Diversity
Step 1: Save all Livni values. Step 2: Set the flag PC = false. Step 3: Set decoding attempt number i = 1 and assume the
maximum decoding attempt number to be Imax. Step 4: Perform the LBP considering all Livni values. i = i + 1. Step 5: If all of the CNs are satisfied, set PC = true. Step 6:
While i ≤ Imax and PC = false Perform Algorithm 1 considering all Livni values. However, α is randomly determined from A = {1, 2, · · · , Γ} in each updates. If more than one edge that has the first Γ largest residual values locates in the same CN, increase the size of A such that we always have Γ CNs to choose in an update. i = i + 1. If all of the CNs are satisfied, set PC = true.
End While Step 7: Return the decoded results in the last decoder.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, benefiting from the technique of LDPC-like sparse graphs of the Polar codes, decoding schedules that outperforms the original Arıkan’s BP are first investigated. A BP decoding algorithm which guarantees the schedule diversity is then further devised based on both the LBP and the proposed modified NW-RBP schedules. Several sequential

dynamic decoding schedules are thus produced and executed in serial. For the proposed scheme with schedule diversity, it is shown through simulations that when compared to the SCL decoding schemes which consider L = 8 and 32, a lower computational complexity level can be guaranteed, while a performance gap of 0.2 dB is observed in the high-SNR region. However, The nature of BP-based algorithm provides a flexible decoding latency, and makes it more suitable to cope with the schemes which perform iterative decoding and detection processes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. Yu-Hsi Lin for the help with simulations.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: a method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051-3073, July 2009.
[2] 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), “Technical specification group radio access network,” 3GPP TS 38.212 V.15.0.0, 2017.
[3] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213-2226, May 2015.
[4] G. D. Forney, “Codes on graphs: normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 520-548, Feb. 2001.
[5] E. Arıkan, “Polar codes: a pipelined implementation,” in Proc. 4th international Symposium on Broadband Communication (ISBC2010), July 11-14 2010, pp. 11-14.
[6] N. Goela, S. B. Korada, and M. Gastpar, “On LP decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Aug. 2010, pp. 15.
[7] M. Fossorier, “Polar codes: graph representation and duality,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 1484-1487, Sept. 2015.
[8] S. Cammerer, M. Ebada, A. Elkelesh and S. ten Brink, “Sparse graphs for belief propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), June 2018, pp. 1465-1469.
[9] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolio´, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput lowdensity parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conference (IEEE GLOBECOM), San Antonio, TX, USA, Nov. 2001, pp. 3019-3024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[10] M. M. Mansourm and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976-996, Dec. 2003.
[11] H.-C. Lee and Y.-L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104-3113, Sept. 2014.
[12] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation: informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in Proc. the Twenty-Second Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, AUAI Press, 2006, pp. 165V173.
[13] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886-896, Mar. 2013.
[14] A. I. Vila Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2007 IEEE International Conference on Communications (IEEE ICC), Glasgow, Scotland, June 2007.
[15] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 34703479, Dec. 2010.
[16] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Belief propagation decoding of polar codes on permuted factor graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (IEEE WCNC), Apr. 2018, pp. 1-6.
[17] E. Arıkan, “Systematic polar coding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 860-862, Aug. 2011.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

