Efficient LDPC Encoder Designs for Magnetic Recording Media

Dimitris Theodoropoulos Dept. of Informatics and Telecommunications National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
Athens, Greece theodimitris@di.uoa.gr

Nektarios Kranitis Dept. of Digital Systems University of the Peloponnese
Sparta, Greece nkran@di.uoa.gr

Antonis Tsigkanos Dept. of Informatics and Telecommunications National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
Athens, Greece antts@di.uoa.gr

Antonios Paschalis Dept. of Informatics and Telecommunications National and Kapodistrian University of Athens
Athens, Greece paschalis@di.uoa.gr

Abstract—Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are widely considered an advantageous option for forward error correction (FEC) on magnetic recording (MR) media. The vast majority of related research, however, has so far been focused on the analytical optimization of code design and algorithms. Although high-speed encoding and decoding with low hardware footprint are important for MR media, hardware implementations for such encoding schemes have so far been scarce. Among the proposed LDPC code variants, protograph-based codes are a promising option, because of their excellent performance characteristics and efficient implementation. In this work, we leverage the architecture of our previous work on LDPC encoders for space applications and we propose efficient encoder designs for the protograph-based LDPC codes proposed so far for MR media. The proposed designs are implemented in hardware as Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) accelerators. The efficiency of the introduced architectures is demonstrated on an FPGA development board, achieving multi-Gbps throughput, adequate for modern MR application standards.
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes have been widely adopted in a multitude of modern communication standards, owing to their capacity approaching performance, as well as efficient code design techniques that facilitate hardware implementation. A lot of research has also been carried out in the last decade on their endorsement in MR media applications. A summary of recent advancements is provided in [1]. Research interest, however, is mainly focused on the theoretical properties of the proposed LDPC codes and the algorithmic calculation of their performance on the channel model that describes MR media. Hardware implementations of efficient encoding schemes in particular, are very limited. For example, the work in [2], which describes a hardware simulator for MR codes, focused on code properties and decoder design. Consequently, hardware implementations of LDPC encoders in MR media remain an open research direction.
978-1-7281-9457-8/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

Among the codes proposed for MR media, variants of a particular class of LDPC codes, protograph-based codes, exhibit excellent FEC performance characteristics in a wide range of signal to noise ratio (SNR) values and at the same time facilitate hardware implementation. Protograph codes have also been proposed for a wide range of applications [3]. The protograph structure results in codes, the parity check matrix of which exhibits a quasi-cyclic (QC) structure and this structure leads into efficient encoding and decoding schemes. A multitude of such encoder architectures for QCLDPC codes has been proposed in the literature. Most of the proposed architectures, however, are optimized for the specific codes adopted by corresponding standards (IEEE 802.11ac, 802.11e, 802.11n,802.22), leveraging the specific properties of the particular code structure. Moreover, those with practical throughput scalable to the range of multiple Gbps, are either entirely not applicable or are not expected to retain the same performance, when used for MR codes, the parity-check matrices of which do not exhibit the required structure. Examples of such cases have been proposed in [4]–[8]. High throughput is important for modern and future MR interface bus channels, demanding currently up to 500 MB/s. These needs are not expected to be satisfied by existing encoder architectures.
In our previous work in [9], we had introduced an efficient encoding architecture for QC-LDPC codes adopted by the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS), for use in deep-space and near-earth telemetry channel coding. The demonstrated architecture achieved state-of-the-art throughput performance for the specified codes, while at the same time keeping resource utilization low. In the current work, we leverage this architecture to design efficient encoder designs for the protograph codes proposed in [1], [10], [11] and [12] for MR media. The proposed encoder designs are implemented as FPGA accelerators and demonstrated on a ZC706 development platform. It is shown that they can easily

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

meet performance requirements, demanding only a small fraction of the hardware resources available on a Zynq XC7Z045-2 SoC.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II provides the necessary background on protograph-based QC LDPC codes and the encoding architecture proposed in previous work [9], upon which the current designs are based. Section III describes the characteristics of the protograph LDPC codes which have been proposed for MR media and the proposed encoder designs for each one of them. In Section IV we provide hardware implementation results, while Section V concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Protograph LDPC codes
In general, a LDPC code is defined by its parity-check matrix H = (hi,j), 1 ≥ i ≥ µ, 1 ≥ j ≥ ν, where ν is the codeword length and µ the number of parity check equations. An equivalent representation can be provided in the form of a Tanner (or bipartite) graph [13], which contain two types of connected nodes: each row of H is represented as a check node in the graph and each column as a variable node. There is a connection between one check node ci and a variable node uj if and only if hi,j = 1.
Initial LDPC codes introduced by Gallager in [14] were random and so were the corresponding graphs. On the contrary, the construction method of protograph codes results in significant structure in their parity check matrices and their graphs. A protograph is defined by a small Tanner graph, comprising a low number of check and variable nodes. Contrary to a full Tanner graph, a protograph can contain parallel edges. For a protograph G = (V, C, E), V, C and E are the sets of variable nodes, check nodes and edges respectively. The cardinality and the members of these sets are defined with the help of analytical methods, like extrinsic information (EXIT) chart analysis [15] and asymptotic weight distribution (AWD) [16], so that performance criteria are met. Specifically for MR media codes, performance is evaluated against channels with memory, like the one or two dimensional Inter Symbol Interference (ISI) or the ergodic Nakagami fading channel.
Starting from the protograph, the full final graph of the codes we are interested in is obtained in two expansion steps as follows: first, the protograph is repeated x times and the edges on the expanded (or derived) graph are permuted among the copies of the protograph, so that any parallel edges in the graph are removed. The edge permutations are calculated according to a computer search algorithm, like Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) [17] or Approximate Cycle Extrinsic Message Degree (ACE) [18], which aims to maximize the girth and the distance of the code. These parameters are strongly related to the performance characteristics of the code and more specifically, the error floor and the decoding threshold. After this first step, a second expansion step follows and the final graph is derived. Again, the nodes are repeated m times and edges are randomly permuted according to computer search algorithms. It is important, however to note that node degree

(i.e. the number of incident nodes) is preserved during each expansion step, as is the neighborhood of a node: if a variable node uj ∈ V is connected to a ci ∈ C with one edge, any variable node in the expanded graph that has been created as a copy of uj, is connected with exactly one replica of ci. It follows that parallel edges in G result in as many connections between the copies of the connected nodes as the number of these parallel edges.
As a consequence of the expansion process, the resulting code is typically a quasi-cyclic (QC) code, the H matrix of which is an array of juxtaposed permutation matrices. If r = |C| and c = |V|, the H matrix of a QC code is given in (1), where Π(m) are either m × m permutation or zero matrices. Each protograph variable node corresponds to one column of (1), while each row to one check node. This characteristic structure facilitates encoding to a large extent.

Πm(1, 1) . . . Πm(1, c)

H = 

...

...

...

 

(1)

Πm(r, 1) . . . Πm(r, c)

B. Encoder architecture

In our previous work in [9], we had described the possible encoding methods for the QC LDPC codes of CCSDS standards. It had been shown that for high rate codes, optimal throughput is attained by the partitioned-H encoding method. This method is based on the fact that for all systematic binary codes, a codeword v is partitioned into a copy of the input information block bits s and the parity bits vector p, such that: c = s p . Assuming a full rank binary code (i.e. without redundant rows in H), the parity-check matrix can be accordingly partitioned into two submatrices: the rightmost µ × µ square submatrix, H2 and the leftmost remaining part H1, of size µ×(ν −µ): H = H1 H2 . If H2 is invertible, or it can be transformed into an invertible matrix through row and column permutations, calculation of p can be done according to (2). H1 is sparse and for QC codes, H2−1 is a dense rx×rx array of dense cyclic matrices of size m × m (circulants).

pT = H2−1H1sT

(2)

The main challenge of the hardware encoder architectures
proposed in [9] was the calculation of (2) in a number of
steps, in order to optimize clock speed. The critical path of
the encoder was dependent on the dense matrix operation involving H2−1. To address this issue, we had introduced in [9] an efficient architecture, based on linear feedback shift
registers (LFSRs) and an optimized calculation scheduling. At each encoding cycle, rLm bits belonging to the intermediate vector uT = H1sT are calculated with simple combinatorial logic elements, since submatrix H1 is sparse. Parameter Lm denotes the degree of parallelism of the architecture. These rLm bits are consumed at the next clock cycle by the LFSR structure. Consequently, the memory requirements for intermediate results are minimum. Calculation of all the cxm parity bits has been concluded in m/Lm + 1 clock cycles. With the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

redesign analyzed in a Section III, the proposed architecture can be used for MR media LDPC codes.
III. ENCODER DESIGNS
Protograph LDPC codes for MR media have been proposed in [1] and [10]–[12]. In this Section, these codes are briefly described and encoder designs for each one of them are proposed.
A. IARA
In [10], the authors propose a series of three punctured protograph LDPC codes for use in the partial response channel, which is useful for modeling one dimensional MR (ODMR) systems. Puncturing is a technique to maintain the desired code rate by omitting (i.e. not transmitting) some of the parity bits. The authors call these codes Improved Accumulate-RepeatAccumulate or IARA codes. It is shown that they exhibit lower decoding thresholds, improved convergence speed and overall better bit-error rate (BER) than conventional protograph LDPC codes for the AWGN channel. In particular, the comparison is made against AR3A, AR4JA and a regular LDPC code with column weight 3 in the dicode and EPR4 channels. Furthermore, the performance of one variant (rate 1/2 IARA2) of these codes over the ergodic Nakagami fading channels is examined in [19].
The protographs for IARA codes and the corresponding parity-check matrices for rate 4/5 are displayed in Fig. 1. The parity check matrices of rate 4/5 of IARA codes are also displayed in Fig. 1 as an example. IM and 0M are the M ×M identity and zero matrix correspondingly, where M = xm. Each variable node, after protograph expansion, corresponds to one column of the parity check matrix. In the figure, node u1 corresponds to the rightmost column and the rest columns are numbered successively from right to left. Check nodes correspond to the rows of the parity check matrix and they are numbered from the top to the bottom of the matrix (c1 corresponds to the first row). Parity bits are derived from the expansion of nodes v1, v2, v3. Node v1, however, is a punctured node: the parity bits generated from this node are not transmitted. A submatrix PMi is a x × x array of either m × m permutation matrices, or m × m zero matrices. The number of permutation matrices on each row or column of PMi is i. The exact position of the permutation matrices in the array, as well as the permutation values, are defined by the selected protograph expansion algorithm. Note also that the protograph of IARA3 code is almost identical to that of AR4JA code, with the selection of the punctured node being the only difference between them.

0M

H2−(1I ARA)

=

0M 



IM

Wm(1, 1) . . .

...

...

Wm(3x, 1) . . .

Wm(1, 2x) 

...

  (3)





Wm(3x, 2x)

Submatrix H1 corresponds to the expanded protograph nodes u4 and higher. The particular numbering of protograph

nodes in Fig. 1 results in an efficient structure of matrix H2−1, which is given in (3). It is composed of the M × M zero and identity matrices, 0M and IM respectively, and an 3x×2x array of juxtaposed m×m dense circulants, Wm(i, j). Specifically for the IARA3 code, Wm(i, j) = 0m, i > 2w. Note also that the last M bits of the encoded codeword are punctured, consequently the last M rows of H2−1 can in any case be substituted with zeros.
Leveraging the structure of H2−1 matrix, we can introduce an efficient encoding scheme. The first x bits of intermediate vector uT can be omitted because the first M columns of H2−1 are zeros (bits corresponding to IM in (3) are punctured. This leads to a significant simplification of the encoder architecture. If submatrix W is the 3x × 2x array of Wm circulants, parity bits can be calculated by multiplication of the last 2xm bits of intermediate vector uT with W .
The proposed encoder design for IARA codes is displayed in Fig. 2. Input bits are initially stored into a series of r × mbit cyclic shift registers, where r = k/m. At each clock cycle, these registers are rotated cyclically by Lm bit positions. The permutation and summation modules calculate Lm of totally m bits of each subvector ui, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3x at the same clock cycle. Subvector u(ie)Lm includes the Lm bits of ui during the e-th execution cycle. Obviously, 1 ≤ m/Lm ≤ 3. These 3xLm bits are fed to the LFSR structure we introduced in [9] for the efficient multiplication of a vector with a QC matrix. After m/Lm + 1 cycles, the calculation of the 2xm parity bits will have been concluded.
B. 2-D-P1 and 2-D-P2
The authors in [11] examine the performance of protograph
LDPC codes over 2-D InterSymbol Interference (ISI) chan-
nels, which are suitable for high density two dimensional
MR systems. In such scenarios, there is interference not
only between adjacent bits, but also between tracks. Based
on asymptotic weight distribution and Extrinsic Information
(EXIT) chart analysis [15], two types of codes are constructed:
2-D-P1 and 2-D-P2 codes. The proposed codes have better
decoding thresholds, lower floors and better error performance
in 2-D ISI channel than conventional protograph AR4JA and
AR3A codes, which are optimized for the AWGN channel. The protograph for these codes is given in Fig. 3. We
propose a reordering of protograph nodes, as described in the figure, which results in an efficient structure of H2−1. This structure is the same for 2-D-P1 and 2-D-P2 and it is described in (4). The definition of matrices IM , 0M and Wm(i, j) is the same as the previous paragraph. Because of the structure of H2−1, the last xm parity bits are equal to the first m bits of the intermediate vector uT . If W is the 2x × 3x array of Wm(i, j) circulants, p = p1 p2 is the parity bits vector, parity calculation is summarized in (5).

 Wm(1, 1) . . . Wm(1, 3x) 

H2−(12DP )

=

 

...

Wm(2x,

1)

... ...

...

 

Wm(2x, 3x)

(4)

IM

0M

0M

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. IARA protographs and parity-check matrices for rate 4/5 codes.

Fig. 2. Encoder design for IARA codes. Last m parity bits are punctured

Fig. 4. Encoder design for 2-D-P [11], nested high-rate ISI [12] and RCOP [1] codes. Parameter f is 3 for 2-D-P and RCOP codes and 2 for ISI.

Fig. 3. 2-D-P protographs and parity-check matrices for rate 4/5 codes. The dashed line between u4 and c2 is present only for 2-D-P2 code. Conversely, the marked submatrix 0M ∗ becomes IM for 2-D-P2. Edge degree > 1 is given as a number along each edge.

p1T = W uT p2T = [u0 . . . uxm−1]T

(5)

The proposed encoding design for these codes is displayed in

Fig. 4 and it will be shown later in the current Section that

it can been also used for other codes, with adjustment of the
size of the LFSR (parameter f in the figure). The calculation of pT1 is performed as with IARA codes. For the calculation of p2T , successive ui(Lm) subvectors are accumulated at each encoding cycle into simple shift registers. All calculations are

completed after m/Lm cycles.

C. Nested high-rate ISI codes

In [12], the authors show the limitations of punctured protograph codes, when they are used with the Bahl-CockeJelinek-Raviv (BCJR) equalizer in channels with memory and propose a method for designing rate-compatible, capacity approaching protograph codes for partial response channels. In [20], they extend their previous work and they propose two families of protograph codes, optimized for the EPR4 and dicode channels: nested high-rate and extended ratecompatible codes. All the proposed codes perform within

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5. Nested high-rate ISI code protograph and parity-check matrix for rate 4/5.

Fig. 6. RCOP code protograph and parity-check matrix for rate 4/5.

1.1 dB of the independent and uniformly distributed (i.u.d.) capacity limit. In this work, we focus on the first of the proposed code families, henceforth referred to as nested highrate ISI codes, which, starting from a basic rate 1/2 protograph, build higher-rate variants by adding more variable nodes. In contrast, extended rate-compatible codes build higher rates through the addition of check nodes also, leading inevitably to larger graphs.
The proposed protograph structure for nested high-rate ISI codes is displayed in Fig. 5, along with an example of rate 4/5 parity check matrix. The degree distribution of nodes u7 and higher is determined by protograph EXIT chart analysis, aiming at minimizing decoding threshold and it is not constant as in other protograph codes. In the diagram, check node degree distribution for this subset of variable nodes is represented as dci , i = 1, 2, 3.
The structure of matrix H2−1 is provided in (6) and it is identical to that of IARA3 code, without puncturing. As with previous codes, however, the zero elements allow for simplification of the encoding process, by omiting the first xm bits of uT from the dense matrix multiplication W uT . The last xm parity bits are calculated directly from intermediate vector uT , as in the case of 2-D-P codes. Consequently, encoding can take place in an identical way as in (5). It follows that the encoder architecture is the same. Note, however, that submatrix W is considerably smaller than 2-D-P codes and consequently, the LFSR for dense matrix calculations is simpler.


0M  

Wm(1, 1) ...

... ...

Wm(1, 2x) 

...

 

H2−(1I S I )

=

 



 0M



... Wm(2x, 1)

... ...

...

 

(6)



 Wm(2x, 3x) 

IM

0M

0M

D. RCOP
Targeting also the two-dimensional ISI channel, [21] describes a rate-compatible, non-punctured protograph LDPC code family. Starting from a basic rate 1/2 protograph and following a similar methodology to 2-D-P codes [11], the authors leverage the Finite Length (FL) EXIT chart analysis to construct higher rate compatible optimized codes (RCOP). The protograph is displayed in Fig. 6. The structure of matrix H2−1 for this code is identical to (4). Consequently, the parity bits are calculated as in (5) and the proposed encoder architecture is that of Fig. 4.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS AND TESTING
In this Section, we provide hardware implementation results and describe the testing methodology for the designs proposed in Section III, targeting FPGA technology. The implemented encoders were designed as IP cores for Zynq-7000 SoC technology and tested on the Xilinx ZC706 development board. The interfaces of the IP core interfaces follow AMBA AXI4-Stream specification [22], featuring a slave for receiving information bits to be encoded and a master interface for encoded parity bits.
Implementation results are listed in Table I. In all cases, we selected rate 4/5, as this is the lowest rate for practical applications on MR media. For IARA codes, since the maximum edge degree is 3, we select the value of the first expansion step x = 4, so that parallel edges are removed and the total codeword length is comparable to the other codes listed in the table. For the other codes, we set parameter x = 5, which is the maximum edge degree of 2-D-P codes. The throughput is calculated as the average number of parity bits calculated per second. Selection of the second expansion step parameter m was such that the resulting block length is close to 4KB, as required by the International Disk Drive Equipment and Materials Association (IDEMA) Advanced Format (AF) specification. The codes in [10] and [20] have been optimized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS (SYNTHESIZED DESIGN) ON XILINX ZYNQ XC7Z045-2 SOC

Code

Sector

Codeword

Resources

Clock Throughput Application

x m Lm

data (Bytes) length (Bytes) LUTs F/Fs (MHz) (Gbps)

IARA [10]

4 1024 8

2DP [11]/RCOP [21] 5 552 4

Nested ISI [20]

5 552 4

4096 4140 4140

5120 5175 5175

51138 41423 395 39007 41658 367 38082 41595 375

25.28 22.02 22.50

ODMR TDMR ODMR

for the dicode and EPR4 channels, which suffer from one dimensional ISI, while those in [21] and [11] for two dimensional ISI channels, making any encoding performance comparisons between them impossible. The throughput performance achieved satisfies commercial magnetic recording media requirements, while resource utilization is low.
For testing, we performed behavioural simulation of the encoder designs hardware descriptions against a GNU/Octave bit-accurate model. Random data were generated and provided to the design under test (DUT). Encoder responses were compared to GNU/Octave golden template and correct operation of the encoder was verified. For on-chip verification and validation of the implemented designs, we developed a testing environment on the Zynq 7045 SoC, featuring AXI4Stream memory maps connected to the encoder IP core’s interfaces. The contents of the register on the slave interface were initialised with random data through the SoC JTAG port. The generated parity bits were collected to another memory map connected to the core’s master interface and read by the testing software, again through JTAG port and compared to the expected vectors of the GNU/Octave model.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have introduced hardware encoders for protograph LDPC codes which have recently been proposed for applications in MR media, leveraging an efficient encoding architecture for QC-LDPC codes used for space applications. The proposed encoder designs have been implemented targeting FPGA technology and verified on-chip. It has been shown that they can achieve high performance, with a small amount of resource utilization.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Fang, G. Han, G. Cai, F. C. Lau, P. Chen, and Y. L. Guan, “Design Guidelines of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Magnetic Recording Systems,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1574–1606, apr 2018.
[2] H. Zhong, T. Zhong, and E. F. Haratsch, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the magnetic recording channel: Code design and VLSI implementation,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1118–1123, mar 2007.
[3] Y. Fang, G. Bi, Y. L. Guan, and F. C. Lau, “A Survey on Protograph LDPC Codes and Their Applications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1989–2016, oct 2015.
[4] J. Hu and K. Jiang, “The improved LU-based decomposition algorithm for sparse matrix of LDPC code,” in Frontiers in Comput. Educ. Advances in Intell. and Soft Comput., Z. E. Sambath S., Ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2012, vol. 133, pp. 867–874.
[5] G. Tzimpragos, C. Kachris, D. Soudris, and I. Tomkos, “A lowcomplexity implementation of QC-LDPC encoder in reconfigurable logic,” in 2013 23rd Int. Conf. on Field Programmable Logic and Appl. IEEE, sep 2013, pp. 1–4.

[6] S. Yu, C. Liu, P. Zhang, and L. Jiang, “Efficient encoding of QC-LDPC codes with multiple-diagonal parity-check structure,” Electronics Letters, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 320–321, feb 2014.
[7] A. Mahdi and V. Paliouras, “A Low Complexity-High Throughput QCLDPC Encoder,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 2696– 2708, may 2014.
[8] D. Chen, P. Chen, and Y. Fang, “Low-Complexity High-Performance Low-Density Parity-Check Encoder Design for China Digital Radio Standard,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 20 880–20 886, jul 2017.
[9] D. Theodoropoulos, N. Kranitis, A. Tsigkanos, and A. Paschalis, “Efficient Architectures for Multigigabit CCSDS LDPC Encoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., pp. 1–10, mar 2020.
[10] Y. Fang, P. Chen, L. Wang, and F. C. Lau, “Design of protograph LDPC codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2809–2819, 2012.
[11] P. Chen, L. Kong, Y. Fang, and L. Wang, “The Design of Protograph LDPC Codes for 2-D Magnetic Recording Channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 11, nov 2015.
[12] T. Van Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “Protograph-based LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun., 2012, pp. 2166–2170.
[13] R. M. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[14] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, jan 1962.
[15] S. T. Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727– 1737, oct 2001.
[16] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115–1131, jun 2004.
[17] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, jan 2005.
[18] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, aug 2004.
[19] Y. Fang, G. Cai, Z. Yang, P. Chen, and G. Han, “Performance of protograph LDPC codes over ergodic Nakagami fading channels,” in 2017 17th Int. Symp. on Commun. and Inf. Technol., ISCIT 2017, vol. 2018-Janua. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., jul 2017, pp. 1–5.
[20] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “Rate-compatible protograph-based LDPC codes for inter-symbol interference channels,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1632–1635, 2013.
[21] Y. Fang, G. Han, Y. L. Guan, G. Bi, F. C. Lau, and L. Kong, “Finitelength extrinsic information transfer analysis and design of protograph lowdensity parity-check codes for ultra-highdensity magnetic recording channels,” IET Communications, vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 1303–1311, jul 2016.
[22] “AMBA AXI4-Stream Protocol Specification v1.0,” ARM, Tech. Rep., 2010. [Online]. Available: http://infocenter.arm.com

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

