6024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 66, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

On Finding Bipartite Graphs With a Small Number of Short Cycles and Large Girth
Ali Dehghan and Amir H. Banihashemi , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— The problem of finding bipartite (Tanner) graphs with given degree sequences that have large girth and few short cycles is of great interest in many applications including construction of good low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. In this paper, we prove that for given integers α, β, and γ, and degree sequences π and π , the problem of determining whether there exists a simple bipartite graph with degree sequences (π, π ) that has at most α (β and γ) cycles of length four (six and eight, respectively) is NP-complete. This is proved by a two-step polynomial-time reduction from the 3-Partition Problem. On the other hand, using connections to linear hypergraphs, we prove that given the degree sequence π, a polynomial time algorithm can be devised to determine whether there exists a bipartite graph whose degree sequence on one side of the bipartition is π and has a girth of at least six. In addition to these complexity results, we devise a quasi-polynomial time algorithm that can construct a bipartite graph with given (irregular) degree sequences and a girth that increases logarithmically with the size of the graph. Compared to the well-known progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm, the proposed method, in some cases, results in Tanner graphs with larger girth, particularly for scenarios where the degree sequences of the graph are strictly enforced.
Index Terms— Bipartite graphs, Tanner graphs, cycles, short cycles, girth, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, degree distribution, linear hypergraphs, computational complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes can be represented by bipartite graphs, commonly referred to as Tanner graphs. In the bipartition, the nodes on one side of the graph represent the codeword symbols, and the nodes on the other side are representative of parity-check equations that involve their adjacent symbols. These two sets of nodes are called variable nodes and check nodes, respectively. Cycles are fundamental substructures of Tanner graphs, and have a close relationship with the error correction capability of the code [1]–[15].
It is well-known that the performance of LDPC codes under iterative message-passing algorithms is highly dependent on the number of short cycles, in general, and the girth of the
Manuscript received January 2, 2019; revised July 23, 2020; accepted July 24, 2020. Date of publication August 17, 2020; date of current version September 22, 2020. The work of Amir H. Banihashemi was supported by the NSERC Discovery Grant. This article was presented at the 2019 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW). (Corresponding author: Amir H. Banihashemi.)
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: alidehghan@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Communicated by M. Lentmaier, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2020.3017127

code’s Tanner graph, in particular. Generally speaking, larger girth and fewer short cycles are desirable for good performance in both the waterfall, and the error floor region. The construction of LDPC codes with few short cycles and large girth has therefore been the subject of much research. The relationship between the cycle distribution of a Tanner graph and the performance of the corresponding LDPC code was first investigated in [1], where good codes were designed by maximizing the average length of shortest cycles that pass through the variable nodes of the Tanner graph. In [2], to construct good LDPC codes at short block lengths, Hu et al. devised the so-called progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm. The PEG algorithm constructs the Tanner graph by locally maximizing the girth in a greedy fashion. Irregular LDPC codes with superior error floor performance were designed in [3] by avoiding short cycles with a small degree of connectivity to the rest of the Tanner graph. By incorporating similar ideas as those of [3] in the PEG algorithm, Xiao and Banihashemi [4], and later Vukobratovic and Senk [5] as well as Zheng et al. [6] constructed irregular LDPC codes with improved error floor performance compared to the original PEG algorithm. Other LDPC code designs using the notion of cycle connectivity in the Tanner graph were developed in [7], [8], while numerous results were published on LDPC code designs with focus on increasing the girth of the Tanner graph, see, e.g., [10]–[15], and the references therein.
Trapping sets (TS) are the culprits in the error floor region of LDPC codes. They are small subgraphs of the code’s Tanner graph that trap iterative decoders. Trapping sets can be categorized into different categories such as elementary TSs (ETS), leafless ETSs (LETS), non-elementary TSs (NETS), absorbing sets (ABS), elementary ABSs (EABS), and stopping sets (SS). Depending on the channel and the decoding algorithm, a specific category of TSs is responsible for the errors. For example, stopping sets are responsible for the error floor of LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC) under the belief propagation decoding algorithm [16]. For the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and the binary symmetric channel (BSC), the problematic structures are LETSs for variable-regular LDPC codes [17]–[19], and the wider category of ETSs for irregular codes [20]. Absorbing sets [21], [22] are known to be the source of error for bit-flipping algorithms [21] and quantized decoders over the AWGN channel [22], [23]. There has been much research on characterization and efficient search algorithms for different categories of TSs. Stopping sets have been studied in [16],

0018-9448 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEHGHAN AND BANIHASHEMI: ON FINDING BIPARTITE GRAPHS WITH A SMALL NUMBER OF SHORT CYCLES AND LARGE GIRTH

6025

[24]–[32], absorbing sets in [22], [32]–[34], and LETSs, ETSs and NETSs have been the subject of extensive studies in a number of publications [17]–[20], [26], [31], [34]–[36]. Regardless of the category of TSs, the most dominant TSs contain short cycles [32]. Asvadi et al. [37] designed quasicyclic (QC) LDPC codes with low error floor by eliminating short cycles that were part of the dominant trapping sets of the code. In [38], PEG algorithm was modified to improve the ETS distribution of the constructed graph. Other designs that improve error floor performance of LDPC codes by avoiding certain short cycles and their children in the code’s Tanner graph can be found in [39]–[43].
We note that the cycle distribution and the girth of Tanner graphs are also related to the minimum distance of LDPC codes [36], [44]–[47], where larger girth and fewer short cycles are generally beneficial in having a larger minimum distance. Moreover, due to the close relationship between the short cycles of a Tanner graph and the performance of the corresponding code, there has been a flurry of research activity on counting, enumerating and the distribution of short cycles in a Tanner graph [48]–[52].
It is known, based on our own studies and the work of others, that the problem of maximizing the girth for a bipartite graph with a given number of nodes and degree distribution is generally hard, even for the cases where the graph has a quasicyclic structure [13]. To the best of our knowledge, however, no theoretical result on the computational complexity of this problem exists. Related to the problem of maximizing the girth are problems of finding graphs with sufficiently small number of short cycles. The computational complexity of such problems also has not been studied in the literature. This is despite the significant interest in problems of maximizing the girth and minimizing the multiplicity of short cycles in bipartite graphs in the context of design and analysis of LDPC codes, and the numerous publications that propose solutions for a variety of such problems.
In this work, we consider two problems related to finding bipartite graphs with a small number of short cycles, and demonstrate that each is in one extreme of the computational complexity spectrum, i.e., one is NP-complete while the other is solvable in polynomial time. On the one hand, we prove that for given integers α, β, γ, and degree sequences (π, π ), determining whether there exists a simple bipartite graph G with degree sequences (π, π ) such that G has at most α (β and γ) cycles of length four (six and eight, respectively) is NP-complete. On the other hand, we devise a polynomial time algorithm to determine whether for a given degree sequence π, there exists a bipartite graph G with girth at least six such that the nodes on one side of G have degrees π. To prove the NP-completeness of the first problem, we use a two-step polynomial-time reduction starting from the well-known 3Partition Problem. To devise the polynomial time algorithm for the second problem, we establish connections between the problem of our interest and linear hypergraphs.
A well-known algorithm to construct LDPC codes (Tanner graphs) with large girth is the PEG algorithm of [2]. Many varieties of PEG algorithm have been since devised [4]–[6], [38], [53]–[59]. The PEG algorithm is a polynomial-time

greedy algorithm that maximizes the girth locally as the Tanner graph is constructed one edge at a time. It however, appears that if one is interested in strictly enforcing the degrees of variable and check nodes on both sides of the Tanner graph (in either a bi-regular or an irregular graph), the PEG algorithm would result in a graph with a rather small girth. On the other hand, if one allows flexibility on node degrees on one side or both sides of the Tanner graph, the girth of a PEG constructed code can be improved. For example, PEG codes provided in [60] have a strictly uniform degree distribution on the variable node side but only an approximately uniform check node degree distribution. In this paper, we devise a quasi-polynomial time algorithm that starts from a given Tanner graph with an arbitrary degree sequence on each side of the graph and improves the girth iteratively through a sequence of edge switchings. The switchings are designed to maintain the degree sequences of the graph, which can be strictly imposed starting from the initial Tanner graph. This, for example, allows one to design codes with large girth that have optimized irregular degree sequences for both variable and check nodes. We also derive a lower bound on the girth of the constructed graphs. The lower bound is within a factor of four from the best known upper bound on the girth of the graph. We also show that this lower bound can, in some cases, be larger than the lower bound derived in [2] on the girth of PEG-constructed graphs.
The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows: In Section II, we present some definitions and notations. This is followed in Section III by the computational complexity results of the two problems related to finding simple bipartite graphs with a small number of short cycles. Next, in Section IV, we present our construction of irregular bipartite graphs with large girth, and derive the lower bound on the girth of the constructed graphs. Then, we compare the proposed construction and the corresponding lower bound on girth with the PEG algorithm and its lower bound, respectively. The paper is concluded with some remarks in Section V.
II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS
For a given graph G, we denote the node set and the edge set of G by V (G) and E(G), respectively. We say a graph is simple if it has no loop or parallel edges. Throughout this paper, all graphs are simple, unless explicitly stated otherwise. A path of length c in the graph G is a sequence of distinct nodes v1, v2, . . . , vc+1 in V (G), such that {vi, vi+1} ∈ E(G), for 1 ≤ i ≤ c. A cycle of length c is a sequence of distinct nodes v1, v2, . . . , vc in V (G) such that v1, v2, . . . , vc form a path of length c − 1, and {vc, v1} ∈ E(G). We denote the set of cycles of length k, also referred to as k-cycles, by Ck. We use Nk for |Ck|. The length of the shortest cycle(s) in a graph is called the girth of the graph and is denoted by g. For any two nodes v and u, the distance between them, denoted by d(v, u), is the number of edges in the shortest path between v and u. The diameter of a graph G, denoted by diam(G), is the largest distance between any pair of nodes in G.
A graph G = (V, E) is called bipartite if the node set V can be partitioned into two disjoint subsets U and W such that every edge in E connects a node from U to a node from W .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 66, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

Tanner graphs of LDPC codes are bipartite graphs, in which U and W are referred to as variable nodes and check nodes, respectively. In this case, we use notations n and m to denote |U | and |W |, respectively, where n is the code’s block length.
The number of edges incident to a node v is called the degree of v, and is denoted by d(v). A bipartite graph G = (U ∪ W, E) is called bi-regular if all the nodes on the same side of the given bipartition have the same degree. In this case, if all the nodes in U have the same degree dv and all the nodes in W have the same degree dc, we refer to the graph as (dv, dc)-regular. A bipartite graph that is not bi-regular is called irregular. Notations λ¯ and μ¯ are used for the average variable and check node degrees of a bipartite graph, respectively.
A bipartite graph G(U ∪ W, E) is called complete, and is denoted by K|U|,|W |, if every node in U is connected to every node in W . The degree sequences of a bipartite graph G are defined as the two monotonic non-increasing sequences of the node degrees on the two sides of the graph. For example, the complete bipartite graph K2,3 has degree sequences (3, 3) and (2, 2, 2). We also use the notation Km for a complete (non-bipartite) graph with m nodes (in which every node is connected to all the other nodes).
We say a problem A is polynomial-time reducible to a problem B if there is a polynomial-time algorithm for transforming instances of A into instances of B. Polynomial-time reductions are often used in complexity theory to prove NP-completeness, i.e., if Problem A can be reduced to Problem B in polynomial time, then A is no more difficult than B, because whenever an efficient algorithm exists for B, one exists for A as well. Thus, if A is NP-complete, so is B. In this work, all reductions are polynomial time.
III. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF FINDING SIMPLE BIPARTITE GRAPHS WITH FEW SHORT CYCLES
In this section, we study the computational complexity of two problems related to finding simple bipartite graphs with few short cycles. First, we consider the problem of minimizing the number of cycles of length four, six, and eight in a bipartite graph with given degree sequences, and prove that this problem is NP-hard. Next, for a given sequence of positive integers π, we investigate the problem of determining whether there exists a simple bipartite graph G with girth at least six such that G has the (variable node) degree sequence π, and show that this problem is polynomial-time solvable.
A. Minimizing the Number of Short Cycles Is Hard
In this subsection, we prove that the following decision problem associated with minimizing the short cycles in a graph, is strongly NP-complete.1 Min-Short-Cycles Problem. INSTANCE: Integers α, β, γ, and degree sequences (π, π ). QUESTION: Does there exist a simple bipartite graph G with
1An NP-complete problem is called strongly NP-complete if it remains NP-complete even when all of its numerical parameters are bounded by a polynomial in the length of the input.

degree sequences (π, π ) such that N4 ≤ α, N6 ≤ β and N8 ≤ γ?

To prove the NP-completeness of the above problem,

we use a two-step polynomial-time reduction from the

following problem, known to be strongly NP-complete [61]:

3-Partition Problem.

INSTANCE: A positive integer B ∈ Z+, and 3n, n ≥ 1, distinct

integers a1, . . . , a3n ∈ Z+, such that for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3n,

we have2 B/4 < ai < B/2, and we have

3n i=1

ai

=

nB.

QUESTION: Can {a1, . . . , a3n} be partitioned into n

disjoint sets A1, . . . , An such that for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n,

a∈Ai a = B? In the first step, we reduce the above problem to a version

restricted to odd numbers given below.

3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem.

INSTANCE: An integer B ∈ Z+, and 3n distinct odd integers

a1, . . . , a3n ∈ Z+, such that for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3n,

B/4 < ai < B/2, and we have

3n i=1

ai

=

nB.

QUESTION: Can {a1, . . . , a3n} be partitioned into n

disjoint sets A1, . . . , An, such that for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n,

a∈Ai a = B? Theorem 1: The 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem is

strongly NP-complete.

Proof: We reduce the 3-Partition Problem to the

3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem in polynomial time. Let

(a1, . . . , a3n, B) be an instance of the 3-Partition Problem.
We construct an instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B ) of the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem such that the instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B)
for the 3-Partition Problem has a positive answer if and only

if the instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B ) for the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem has a positive answer.

For each i, let ai = 10 ai + 1 and B = 10B + 3. Next, we show that (a1, . . . , a3n, B ) is a valid instance for the
3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem. (Note that if all the

parameters a1, . . . , a3n, B are bounded by a polynomial in

input length, so will be the parameters a1, . . . , a3n, B .) The

numbers a1, . . . , a3n are distinct positive integers, and so are

a1, . . . , a3n. For each i, we have B/4 < ai < B/2, and

thus (10B + 3)/4 < 10ai + 1 < (10B + 3)/2, which means

B /4 < ai < B /2. Moreover,

3n i=1

ai

=

3n i=1

10ai

+

1

=

10nB + 3n = nB . So, (a1, . . . , a3n, B ) is a valid instance

for the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem.

It is clear that there is a one-to-one correspondence between

any valid partitioning of {a1, . . . , a3n} (one that corresponds
to answer “yes”) and a valid partitioning of {a1, . . . , a3n}. Next, we reduce the 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem to

the Min-Short-Cycles Problem.

Theorem 2: The Min-Short-Cycles Problem is strongly NP-

complete.

Proof: Let (a1, . . . , a3n, B) be an instance of the 3-

Partition of Odd Numbers Problem. Correspondingly, we con-

struct an instance (π, π , α, β, γ) of the Min-Short-Cycles

Problem. To construct π, for each ai, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3n, we include the number ai + 1 in π. Also, we include n copies of

2The version of the problem that was studied in [61] does not have the
property that for each i, B/4 < ai < B/2. But, for a given instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B), we can simply convert it to (a1 + B, . . . , a3n + B, 4B),
so that it has the desired property.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEHGHAN AND BANIHASHEMI: ON FINDING BIPARTITE GRAPHS WITH A SMALL NUMBER OF SHORT CYCLES AND LARGE GIRTH

6027

Fig. 1. (a) An instance of graph G and (b) the corresponding semi-normal

graph G .

Fig. 2. All possible types of structures of diameters one and two in G .

the number B + 1 in π. To construct π , we include the

number 4n, and nB copies of the number 2. We also let

α = nB +

3n i=1

ai 2

,

β

=

n

B 2

and γ = 0. One can see

that if all the parameters a1, . . . , a3n, B are bounded by a

polynomial in the length of the input, so will be the parameters

π, π , α, β and γ.

Next, we show in Claims A and B that the answer to the

3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem for a given instance

(a1, . . . , a3n, B) is “yes” if and only if the answer to the corresponding instance (π, π , α, β, γ) of the Min-Short-Cycles

Problem is “yes,” respectively.

Claim A: If the answer to an instance of Min-Short-

Cycles Problem is “yes," then the answer to the corresponding

instance of 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem is “yes."

Proof of Claim A: Let G be the graph corresponding to

the answer “yes” to the instance (π, π , α, β, γ) of the Min-

Short-Cycles Problem. In the following, we first transform G

to another graph G . Using the properties of G , we then show

that there is an instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B) of the 3-Partition of

Odd Numbers Problem with answer “yes.”

The graph G is a simple bipartite graph with 4n variable

nodes and a check node of degree 4n. This check node is thus

connected to all variable nodes. Call this check node universal

check node, and denote it by cu. In G, except cu, all other check nodes have degree 2. From G, we now construct a new

graph G , called the semi-normal graph of G, by removing cu and its adjacent edges from G, and by replacing all the degree-

2 check nodes and their two incident edges by a single edge.

Fig. 1 shows an instance of graph G and its corresponding

semi-normal graph G . There is a one-to-one correspondence

between G and G . Note that G can have several parallel

edges (i.e. it is not a simple graph), but it does not contain

any loops. The semi-normal graph G has n nodes of degree

B and for each i, 1 ≤ i ≤ 3n, it has exactly one node of

degree ai. Claim 1: The diameter of each connected component3 of

G is at most two.

Proof of Claim 1: To the contrary, assume that the diameter

of one of the connected components of G is at least three.

This implies there are two nodes v and v in G such that their

distance in G is three. Correspondingly, there is a path P of

length six in G between the nodes v and v such that it does

not pass through the universal node cu. The union of the path P and two edges vcu, v cu is a cycle of length eight in G. This is in contradiction with γ = 0.

3A graph G is connected if there is a path between any two nodes of G. A connected component of a graph G is a connected subgraph G1 of G, induced by a subset of nodes in G, such that there are no edges between the nodes of G1 and the nodes of the rest of the graph.

From Claim 1, it follows that each connected component of G is a triangle (i.e., K3) or a star (i.e., K1,r, for some r ∈ Z+).
We partition the nodes in G into two sets X and Y , where X is the set of nodes of degree B. The degrees of nodes in Y are {ai}, where each ai is an odd number satisfying B/4 < ai < B/2. Fig. 2 shows all the possible components of G with respect to this partitioning (note that diam(G ) ≤ 2). In Fig. 2, each edge can correspond to a few parallel edges.
Claim 2: The graph G cannot have a connected component of Type 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 10 (see Fig. 2).
Proof of Claim 2: In the following, we study each component type in Claim 2, and prove that it cannot exist in G .
Type 1. In this case, there is exactly one node in Y (call it v) and two nodes in X (call them u and u ). The degree of both u and u is B. Thus, the number of edges between u and v is equal to the number of edges between u and v. Hence, the degree of v is an even number. But this is a contradiction because d(v) = ai, for some i, and is thus an odd number by the assumption.
Type 2. In this case there is exactly one node, say v, in X and two nodes, say u and u , in Y . From the structure, clearly, d(u)+d(u ) > deg(v) = B. By the assumption about the node degrees of Y , however, we have d(u) + d(u ) = ai + aj < B, for some i and j, which is a contradiction.
Type 4. In this case the connected component has exactly three nodes, say x, y and z, in Y . Let dxy (dxz and dyz) be the number of edges between nodes x and y (between x and z and between y and z, respectively). The degree of x is an odd number, and thus exactly one of the numbers dxy or dxz is odd. Without loss of generality, assume that dxy is odd and dxz is even. This together with the fact that d(z) = dxz + dyz is odd implies that dyz is odd. On the other hand, d(y) = dxy + dyz, and will be an even number. But this is a contradiction since d(y) = ai, for some i, and is an odd number by the assumption.
Type 5. In this case all the nodes are in Y and the connected component is bipartite. The left partition has exactly one node, say v, and the right partition has at least two nodes, say u and u (note that by assumption, the numbers a1, . . . , a3n are distinct, and thus the right partition cannot have only one node). Now, counting the number of the edges of the component graph from the left, we have |E| = d(v) < B/2. Counting the number of the edges from the right, however, we have |E| ≥ d(u) + d(u ) > B/4 + B/4 = B/2. This is a contradiction.
Type 6. In this case the connected component has exactly one node in Y and at least one node in X, and is bipartite. Counting the number of edges from the Y side, we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 66, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

Fig. 3. All the potentially possible structures of connected components of G .

|E| = ai < B/2, for some ai, while by counting from the X side, |E| ≥ B, which is a contradiction.
Types 7 and 10. With a proof similar to that of Type 6, one can see neither type of structure is possible.
Based on Claim 2, the only potentially possible structures for connected components of G are those of Types 3, 8 and 9, shown in Fig. 2. In the following, we refine this result and show that all the potentially possible types of connected components of G are those shown in Fig. 3. We note that Type 3 structure in Fig. 2 is the same as structure P 2 in Fig. 3. Type 8 structure in Fig. 2 is bipartite with exactly one node, say v, in X. Based on the degree constraints, it is easy to see that v must be connected to exactly three nodes in Y . This results in structure P 1 in Fig. 3, which is in fact the complete bipartite graph K1,3. In Type 9 structure in Fig. 2, all nodes are in X, and the connected component is a bipartite graph with only one node on the right side of the bipartition. Since all the nodes in X have the same degree B, there must be also only one node on the left side of the bipartition. This results in structure P 3 in Fig. 3.
Next, we show that connected components of Types P 2 and P 3 are impossible to exist in G , and thus G can only have connected components of Type P 1 (see Fig. 3). To show this, we note that each of the 3n nodes in Y is in a connected component of Type P 1. On the other hand, we have |Y | = 3|X|. Thus, all the nodes in X are connected to nodes in Y within Type P 1 structures.
The graph G is therefore consists of n Type P 1 components, where each component represents one of the n 3partitions of odd numbers ai.
Claim B: If the answer to an instance of 3-Partition of Odd Numbers Problem is “yes," then the answer to the corresponding instance of Min-Short-Cycles Problem is “yes."
Proof of Claim B: Assume that the answer to the 3Partition of Odd Numbers Problem for a given instance (a1, . . . , a3n, B) is “yes.” We then show that for the corresponding instance (π, π , α, β, γ) of Min-Short-Cycles Problem, there exists a simple bipartite graph G with degree sequences (π, π ) such that G has at most α (β and γ) cycles of length four (six and eight, respectively).
We first construct G and then show that it satisfies the required cycle properties. Let A1, . . . , An be n disjoint sets such that for each i, i ∈ [n] = {1, . . . , n}, a∈Ai a = B. For each Ai = {aj, ak, al}, i ∈ [n], assign a node x and three nodes y1, y2, y3, and then add aj (ak and al) parallel edges between x and y1 (y2 and y3, respectively). Call the resultant graph G , and consider it as the semi-normal graph of G. From G , construct the bipartite graph G by considering all the nodes in G to be the variable nodes of G, and replacing each edge e = {v, v } in G with a check node of degree 2 connected to

Fig. 4. (a) A hypergraph with a loop, (b) a loopless linear hypergraph.

the two variable nodes v and v , and finally adding a universal

check node cu connected to all the variable nodes. One can see that the degree sequences of G are (π, π ).

We now calculate N4, N6 and N8 in G, and demonstrate that N4 ≤ α, N6 ≤ β and N8 ≤ γ.
Each 4-cycle has two variable nodes that are adjacent to

two common check nodes. We can partition the 4-cycles of

G into two sets, depending on the presence or absence of the

universal check node cu in each 4-cycle. In the first set, each 4-cycle contains cu. To count the number of 4-cycles in this

set, we need to select a check node c other than cu, then the

check nodes c and cu with their two common variable node

neighbors form a 4-cycle. The number of ways to select c is

equal to the number of edges in the semi-normal graph G ,

and is thus nB. A 4-cycle in the second set corresponds to

any two parallel edges in G . The number of 4-cycles in this

set we

is thus have N4

3n i=1

ai 2

.

= nB +

Adding up the 4-cycles

3n i=1

ai 2

= α.

in

the

two

sets,

By the structure of G, it is clear that each 6-cycle contains

the universal check node cu. The other two check nodes of a 6-cycle can be the check nodes corresponding to any two

non-parallel edges of any one of the connected components

of G . Since, we have n connected components in G , and

each connected component has at most

B 2

non-parallel edges,

N6

≤n

B 2

= β.

Finally, we note that G does not have any 8-cycle, i.e., N8 =

0 = γ.

B. Finding Bipartite Graphs With Girth at Least Six Is Easy
In this section, we demonstrate that the problem of determining whether for a given sequence of integers π, there exists a simple bipartite graph G with (variable node) degree sequence π and girth at least six is polynomial-time solvable. To show this, we demonstrate that the hardness of this problem is similar to that of determining whether π can be the degree sequence for a loopless linear hypergraph. The latter problem is known to be solvable in polynomial time [62]. In the following, we first provide an introduction to hypergraphs.
A hypergraph is a generalization of a graph in which an edge can join any number of nodes. A hypergraph G = (V, T ) consists of a node set V and an edge set T , where each edge is a non empty subset of the nodes in V . A loop in a hypergraph is an edge that is a subset of size one of the nodes, i.e., a loop consists of only a single node. Fig. 4(a) shows a hypergraph with a loop.
Definition 1: A hypergraph is linear if any two edges have at most one common node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEHGHAN AND BANIHASHEMI: ON FINDING BIPARTITE GRAPHS WITH A SMALL NUMBER OF SHORT CYCLES AND LARGE GIRTH

6029

Fig. 4(b) shows a loopless linear hypergraph. The degree sequence of a hypergraph is the sequence whose elements are the number of edges to which each node belongs. For example, the degree sequence of the hypergraph shown in Fig. 4(a) is {2, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0}.
It is well-known that linear hypergraphs can be recognized from their degree sequences in polynomial time [62]. Bhave et al. [62] gave the following Erdos-Gallai-type characterization of degree sequences of loopless linear hypergraphs.
Theorem 3 [62]: A sequence [di]ni=1 of non-negative integers arranged in non-increasing order is the degree sequence of a loopless linear hypergraph with n nodes if and only if
n
(i) di is an even number, and
i=1
(ii) for every 1 ≤ j ≤ n,

j

n

di ≤ j(j − 1) +

min{di, j} .

i=1

i=j+1

It is clear that the above conditions can be checked in polynomial time. In the following, we use Theorem 3 to devise a polynomial time algorithm for our problem of interest.
Theorem 4: There is a polynomial time algorithm to decide whether, for a given degree sequence π, there exists a simple bipartite graph G with (variable node) degree sequence π, minimum check node degree two, and girth at least six.
Proof: To prove the result, we show that a graph G with the description of the theorem exists if and only if π is the degree sequence of a loopless linear hypergraph.
Proof of “If Part”: Let H be a loopless linear hypergraph with degree sequence π. In the following, we construct a simple bipartite graph G based on H and demonstrate that G has variable node degree sequence π and girth of at least 6.
For each node x in H, we assign a variable node vx in G, and for each edge e in H, we assign a check node ce in G, i.e., V (G) = {vx : x ∈ V (H)} ∪ {ce : e ∈ T (H)}. We then connect a variable node vx to a check node ce if and only if the edge e that corresponds to ce contains the node x that corresponds to vx, i.e., E(G) = {{vx, ce} : x ∈ e for x ∈ V (H), e ∈ T (H)}. Fig. 5 shows a hypergraph H and its corresponding bipartite graph G. It is clear by the construction that G is simple and that the degree sequence of variable nodes in G is π. (The fact that H is loopless implies that the minimum check node degree in G is 2.) Now, we show that the girth of G is at least 6. To the contrary, assume that the girth of G is four. This implies that there are two variable nodes vx, vy and two check nodes ce, ce such that vxce, vxce , vyce, vyce ∈ E(G). This in turn means that in H, there are two edges e and e such that they have at least two common nodes (x and x ). This is, however, in contradiction with the linearity of H.
Proof of “Only If Part”: Let G be a simple bipartite graph with variable node degree sequence π, dcmin ≥ 2, and g ≥ 6. We now construct a hypergraph H with degree sequence π, and show that it is loopless and linear. For each variable node v (check node c) in G, assign a node x (an edge e) in H. Also, for each edge vc in G, include the node x, corresponding to v, in the edge e, corresponding to c. See Fig. 5. It is easy to

Fig. 5. A hypergraph H and its corresponding bipartite graph G.
see that since dcmin(G) ≥ 2, then H is loopless, and since g(G) ≥ 6, then H is linear.
IV. A TECHNIQUE TO REMOVE SHORT CYCLES OF A BIPARTITE GRAPH
In this section, we use a simple graph transformation, referred to as 2-switching to remove the short cycles of a bipartite graph. We first describe the 2-switching in Subsection IV-A. We then prove, in Subsection IV-B, that given the degree sequences of a bipartite graph, any simple bipartite graph with the given degree sequences can be transformed into another simple bipartite graph with the same degree sequences through a sequence of 2-switchings. This guarantees that one can potentially reach the bipartite graph with the maximum girth by starting from an arbitrary bipartite graph with the same degree sequences and by applying a sequence of transformations based on 2-switching. Finally, in Subsection IV-C, we devise a quasi-polynomial time algorithm based on 2-switchings that can increase the girth to exceed a guaranteed lower bound. This lower bound is also established in Subsection IV-C. We end this section with comparisons between the proposed construction based on 2-switches and the PEG algorithm in Subsection IV-D.
A. 2-Switching
A 2-switch is an operation involving the deletion of two edges from a graph followed by the addition of two edges to the graph such that the degree of each node in the graph is preserved.
Definition 2: Consider four nodes a, b, c, d in a graph G such that ab and cd are edges of G but bc and ad are not. Let H be the graph obtained by deleting ab and cd from G and adding edges bc and ad to G. This operation is called a 2-switch and is denoted by (ab, cd) → (bc, ad).
Fig. 6 shows an example of a 2-switch. Remark 1: We note that the idea of using 2-switches in the construction of bi-regular Tanner graphs with a constraint on girth first appeared in [63] as the main step of a procedure called “emergency procedure” in [63]. This procedure was part of an explicit construction of the graph which involved partitioning the parity-check matrix into sub-matrices, each sub-matrix a permutation of the identity matrix, and then designing the sub-matrices one by one. For each sub-matrix, the location of ‘1’ elements were determined row by row, where in each placement of a ‘1,’ the girth constraint needed to be satisfied. In this process, the “emergency procedure” would

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 66, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

Fig. 6. 2-switching (ab, cd) → (bc, ad).

be evoked if for a given row of a sub-matrix no placement of a ‘1’ was possible without violating the girth constraint. The application of 2-switches in [63], thus, was limited to a subset of edges in the Tanner graph that corresponded to a sub-matrix of the parity-check matrix. In the application of 2-switches in our constructions, however, such a limitation is not imposed. In addition, the procedure to identify the edges that are to be switched in our work is different than the one in [63]. As a result of these differences, the lower bound on the girth, as well as the actual girth, of our constructed graphs are larger than those in [63]. In fact, in Subsection IV-B, we show that 2-switches, if deployed globally in the Tanner graph (in contrary to the local deployment used in [63]), are strong enough to transform any two co-degree simple bipartite graphs (simple graphs with the same degree sequences) to each other such that all intermediate graphs are also bipartite and simple.
B. Transformation Between Any Two Bipartite Graphs Using 2-Switching
It is well-known that any two co-degree graphs (not necessarily bipartite) can be transformed to each other through some 2-switches [64, p. 47]. In the following, we prove a similar result for simple bipartite graphs with the restriction that all intermediate graphs are also simple and bipartite. This restriction is important because it limits the search space to simple bipartite graphs rather than the space of all graphs (bipartite and otherwise).
Lemma 1: For any two co-degree simple bipartite graphs G and H, it is possible to find a sequence of 2-switches that transforms G into H such that all intermediate graphs are also bipartite and simple.
Proof: Let G and H be two co-degree simple bipartite graphs. We prove our claim by induction on the number of nodes on one side of the graph (for instance the number of variable nodes). If G has one variable node, then it is clear that H also has exactly one variable node and the two graphs are isomorphic. Now, assume that G has k > 1 variable nodes (Graph H also has k variable nodes). Let vj be a variable node with maximum degree dvmax in G, and let M be the set of check nodes with dmv ax highest degrees in G (i.e., if we order the check nodes based on their decreasing degrees, then M is the set of the first dvmax check nodes in the list). Let Nvj (G) denote the set of neighbors of vj in G. Consider the case where Nvj (G) = M (if Nvj (G) = M , then no switching is required). In this case, there are two nodes c and c such that c ∈ M , c ∈/ M , and vjc ∈/ E(G), vjc ∈ E(G). Since d(c) ≥ d(c ), there is a variable node vi such that vic ∈ E(G) and vic ∈/ E(G). Apply the 2-switch (vjc , vic) → (vjc, vic ). We repeat this process until we reach a graph G such that

Fig. 7. Two bipartite graphs G and H.

Nvj (G ) = M (call the sequence of 2-switches to reach to G from G, elementary 2-switches for G).

We apply the same procedure (elementary 2-switches) to H

to obtain the graph H such a variable node with degree

dthvmaatxNinvj

(H H,

)= and

M M

, where vj is the set

is of

check nodes with dmv ax highest degrees in H. By deleting the

nodes vj and vj and their adjacent edges from graphs G and

H , respectively, and using the induction hypothesis for the

pair of graphs G \ {vj} and H \ {vj}, we obtain a sequence of 2-switches that transform G into H . Those 2-switches plus

the elementary 2-switches for G and H give us a sequence of

2-switches that transforms G into H.

In the proof of Lemma 1, we note that the number of elementary 2-switches is at most dvmax for each of the two graphs G and H. This implies that the total number of

2-switches required to transform G to H is upper bounded by 2n × dvmax, where n is the number of variable nodes in each graph.

Example 1: Consider the two graphs G and H with the

set of variable nodes {1, 2, 3, 4}, and the set of check nodes

{5, 6, 7, 8} shown in Fig. 7. We use the approach of Lemma 1

to transform H to G. First, we start with G. The steps of

transformation of G into a graph with only one variable node

are shown in Fig. 8. All variable nodes and check nodes in

G have the same degree. So, we arbitrarily choose vj = 1 and M = {5, 8}. We have Nvj (G) = M , and thus no switching is required in the first step. We just delete vj and

its adjacent edges from the graph, and obtain the graph shown

in Fig. 8(b). For the next step, we choose vj = 2, and
have M = {6, 7}. In this case, Nvj = M , and we perform the 2-switch (25, 73) → (27, 53) to obtain the graph shown

in Fig. 8(c). Now, we have Nvj = M , and thus delete vj and its adjacent edges to obtain the graph of Fig. 8(d). Next,

we choose vj = 3 and M = {5, 6}, and since Nvj = M , we delete vj and its adjacent edges to reach a graph with

only one variable node. This terminates the process. A similar

process for H is depicted in Fig. 9, where three 2-switches,

(25, 37) → (27, 35), (26, 48) → (28, 46), and (38, 46) →

(36, 48) are used throughout the process. To transform H to G,

one can then use these three 2-switches followed by the reverse

of the 2-switch that was used in the process of converting G

into a graph with one variable node, i.e., (27, 53) → (25, 73).

Fig. 10 shows the application of the sequence of 2-switches

that transform H to G.

We note that the sequence of 2-switches just described is

not optimal, in the sense that H can be converted to G with

a smaller number of 2-switches. In fact, we can transform H

to G using only one 2-switch of (26, 38) → (28, 36).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEHGHAN AND BANIHASHEMI: ON FINDING BIPARTITE GRAPHS WITH A SMALL NUMBER OF SHORT CYCLES AND LARGE GIRTH

6031

Fig. 8. The transformation of Graph G into a graph with only one variable node using 2-switches.

Fig. 10. Transformation of H to G using 2-switches.

where μ and λ are the average degree of check nodes and variable nodes, respectively, which are assumed to satisfy μ ≥ λ ≥ 2.33, and m is the number of check nodes.

Algorithm 1 Proposed 2-Switching Algorithm

Let G be a simple bipartite graph with the average variable and check node degrees λ and μ, respectively (μ ≥ λ ≥ 2.33),

and with m check nodes and n variable nodes. We perform

the following steps until the graph does not contain any cycle

of length less than or equal to

η(m,λ,μ) 2

− 1.

Step 1. Let g be the girth of the input graph, and let v and u

be two nodes with their distance at least η(m, λ, μ).

Step 2. Find a cycle C whose length is equal to g.
Step 3. For all nodes x in the cycle C, compute d(x, v)
and d(x, u). Let z = argmax{max(d(x, v), d(x, u))}, and
x∈V (C)
d(z, v) ≥ d(z, u). Let z be one of the neighbors of z in the

cycle C and let v be one of the neighbors of v.

Step 4. Apply a 2-switch to zz and vv such that the resultant

graph remains bipartite.

Step 5. If the resultant graph has a cycle of length less than

or equal to

η(m,λ,μ) 2

− 1, go to Step 1.

Fig. 9. The transformation of Graph H into a graph with only one variable node using 2-switches.

C. Removing Short Cycles of a Simple Bipartite Graph Using 2-Switching
The proposed algorithm to remove the short cycles in a bipartite graph is capable of increasing the girth to at least η/2 , where η is a lower bound on the diameter of the graph. In the following lemma, whose proof is given in Appendix, we establish the lower bound η.
Lemma 2: For every simple bipartite graph G, we have

log η(m, λ, μ) =Δ 2 ×

m ([(λ − 1)(μ − 1)] − 1) + 1
λ

log[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

≤ diam(G) ,

−1 (1)

We note that in the iterative process of going through Steps

1-5, the degree distribution of the graph, and thus the lower

bound η(m, λ, μ) on the diameter of the graph do not change.

One can thus always find the two nodes u and v in Step 1 of

the algorithm.

Theorem 5: Let G be a graph with m check nodes and

with the average variable and check node degrees λ and μ,

respectively (μ ≥ λ ≥ 2.33). If we apply the proposed

2-switching algorithm (Algorithm 1) to G, then, the girth of

the resulting graph is at least

η(m,λ,μ) 2

, where η(m, λ, μ) is

given in Lemma 2.

Proof: We show that at each iteration, at least one cycle

of minimum length (g) will be removed and no new cycle

of minimum length will be created (i.e., the multiplicity of

cycles of length g will be reduced by at least one). Assume

that we are in the k-th iteration of the algorithm, and let C be

the cycle that is found in Step 1. Also, assume that d(z, v) =

max{d(x, v), d(x, u)|x ∈ V (C)}, and suppose that z is one

of the neighbors of z in C, and v is one of the neighbors of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 66, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

Fig. 11. The 2-switch (zz , vv ) → (zv , z v).

Fig. 12. Different types of new cycles that can be created after the application of 2-switch (zz , vv ) → (zv , z v).

v in the graph. We have d(z, v) ≥ d(z, u), and thus d(z, v) ≥

η(m,λ,μ) 2

,

because otherwise,

d(v, u) ≤ d(z, v) + d(z, u) <

η(m, λ, μ), which contradicts the assumption of Step 1 about

d(v, u). Now, we apply the 2-switch (zz , vv ) → (zv , z v).

(Without loss of generality, we have assumed that z and v are

on the same side of bipartition.) Fig. 11 shows the application

of the 2-switch (zz , vv ) → (zv , z v).

This switch eliminates C. In the following, we show that

the switch does not create any new cycle of length g, and thus

as a result of the switch, the number of g-cycles is reduced

by at least one.

After the application of the 2-switch (zz , vv ) → (zv , z v),

we can have four different types of new cycles in the graph.

These are shown in Fig. 12.

Case 1. In this case, P1 and P2 are two paths in the graph. Since P1 ∪ {zz } and P2 ∪ {vv } are cycles, the lengths of P1 and P2 are at least g − 1. Thus, the new cycle P1 ∪ e ∪ P2 ∪ e has length at least 2g, and its creation does not change the

number of g-cycles.

Case 2. In this case, the length of P4 is at least d(v, z),

which in turn is at least

η(m,λ,μ) 2

. On the other hand, zz

∪

P3 ∪ v v is a path between nodes z and v, and thus the length

of P3 is at least

η(m,λ,μ) 2

−2. This means the new cycle P3 ∪

e ∪ P4 ∪ e

has length at least 2

η(m,λ,μ) 2

. Consequently, this

new cycle does not change the number of g-cycles, because

while the algorithm is running, g ≤ η(m, λ, μ)/2 − 1.

Case 3. In this case, P5 ∪ v v is a path between the nodes z

and v, and thus, the length of P5 is at least

η(m,λ,μ) 2

− 1. So,

in this case, the new cycle P5∪e has length at least

η(m,λ,μ) 2

,

and therefore, it does not change the number of g-cycles.

Case 4. Similar to Case 3.

Proposition 1: The proposed 2-switching algorithm

(Algorithm 1) has a quasi-polynomial time complexity.

Proof: We first study the number of iterations of the

algorithm. The number of iterations is equal to the number

of g-cycles, throughout the execution of the algorithm (note

that as the switchings take place, the number of cycles of

length larger than g keeps changing, but that is not of any

consequence in this analysis, as at any given point, we are only

concerned about the cycles of length g). By using an exhaus-

tive brute-force search of the graph, one can establish the upper

bound

of

O(mdgvm /2ax

dg/2
cmax

)

on

the

number

of

g-cycles.

On

the

other hand, throughout the algorithm, the value g, is less than

or equal to

η(m,λ,μ) 2

−1, which is of order O(log m). Putting

these two upper bounds together, it follows that the number

of iterations is bounded from above by O(m log mDlog m),

where D = max(dvmax , dcmax ), and the multiplicative term log m is to account for the number of times that the girth of the

graph increases throughout the process. Now, considering that

in the worst case scenario, parameter D increases linearly with

max(n, m), and assuming that the ratio m/n is a constant, the number of iterations is O(mlog m+1).

Next, we study the computational complexity of operations

required in each iteration of the algorithm. For Step 1, one can

find two nodes v and u with the largest distance among all the

node pairs in the graph. This can be performed in polynomial

time, e.g., using the Floyd–Warshall algorithm [65]. Using the

same algorithm, Step 3 of Algorithm 1 can be implemented

in polynomial time. For Step 2, one needs to find a cycle of

length g. This can be performed in polynomial time, using,

e.g., the algorithm of [66]. The complexity of Step 4 is O(1).

For Step 5, one needs to calculate the girth of the graph,

which can be performed in polynomial time, see, e.g., [49].

The complexity of each iteration is therefore polynomial.

Putting together the upper bounds on the number of itera-

tions and the complexity of each iteration, the overall complexity is O(mlog m+c), for some constant c.

Based on Theorem 5, after the application of Algorithm 1,

the girth of the graph is at least

η(m,λ,μ) 2

. We thus have the

following range on the girth of the resultant graph:

η(m, λ, μ) 2

≤g≤4

η(m, λ, μ) + 1 2

,

(2)

where the upper bound is for a general bipartite graph with

m check nodes and with the average variable and check node

degrees λ and μ, respectively [67]. As can be seen, for large

graphs, the difference between the lower and the upper bounds

is a factor of four.

Finally, in our experiments with Algorithm 1, the girth of

the output graph was always equal to the lower bound of (2). This implies that, for example, for λ = 3 and μ = 6,
to obtain g = 6, 8, and 10, the value of m needs to be at least about 1.07 × 104, 1.07 × 106, and 1.07 × 108, respectively.

These are relatively large values for the corresponding girths.

Nevertheless, for fixed values of λ and μ, the girth of the

output graph increases logarithmically with the size of the

graph.

To further improve the girth of the graph beyond what is

guaranteed by Theorem 5, we add the following two iterative

steps to Algorithm 1:

Step 6. Find a g-cycle C in the Tanner graph, and randomly choose one of the edges of C, say e = ss . Next, randomly select an edge e = ww in the graph such that none of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEHGHAN AND BANIHASHEMI: ON FINDING BIPARTITE GRAPHS WITH A SMALL NUMBER OF SHORT CYCLES AND LARGE GIRTH

6033

edges sw, sw , s w, or s w is in the graph. Apply a 2-switch to e and e such that the resultant graph remains bipartite. If the resultant graph has more g-cycles than the original graph, reverse the 2-switch.
Step 7. Randomly choose two edges e = ss and e = ww of the Tanner graph such that none of the edges sw, sw , s w, or s w is in the graph. Apply a 2-switch to e and e such that the resultant graph remains bipartite. If the resultant graph has more g-cycles than the original graph, reverse the 2-switch. Lemma 1 guarantees that, given sufficient time, random 2-switches (Step 7) can result in a co-degree Tanner graph with maximum girth. To speed up the process, however, we have added Step 6 to the algorithm. In the absence of Step 7, Step 6 may be trapped in a local maximum.

D. Comparisons Between the Proposed 2-Switching Method and PEG Algorithm

PEG algorithm [2] is known to produce Tanner graphs with large girth. In the following, we compare the lower bound on the girth of PEG-constructed Tanner graphs with the lower bound of (2) on the girth of Tanner graphs constructed by Algorithm 1. Through this comparison, we demonstrate that for certain graph parameters, the latter bound is larger than the former. We also present examples where the combination of Algorithm 1 and Steps 6 and 7, presented in the previous subsection, can produce Tanner graphs with larger girth compared to graphs constructed by the PEG algorithm.
Theorem 6 [2]: Let G be an irregular PEG Tanner graph in which dcmax and dvmax are the largest degrees of check nodes and variable nodes, respectively, and m is the number of check nodes. The girth g of G is lower bounded by

g ≥ 2( tilorwr + 2) ,

(3)

where tliorwr is given by

tilorwr

=

log

mdmc ax

−

mdm c ax dvmax

−m+1

log[(dmc ax − 1)(dvmax − 1)]

−1.

(4)

By some simple manipulations, the lower bound of (3) can be rewritten as

log g≥2

m dm v ax

×

([(dmv ax

−

1)(dmc ax

−

1)]

−

1) +

1

log[(dvmax − 1)(dmc ax − 1)]

+ 2, (5)

which has a similar form to the lower bound of (2) if λ and μ

in η(m, λ, μ) are replaced with dvmax and dcmax, respectively. It

can be seen that the lower bound of (2) is larger that that of (5)

for cases where m is large and the difference between dmc ax

and μ, or dmv ax and λ is a large number. As an example, for the

case

of

rate-

1 2

codes

of (2) is larger than

with λ that of

= (5)

3 and μ if dmc ax

= ≥

6, the lower bound 50, dvmax ≥ 50 and

m ≥ 100. If we consider m ≥ 12, 000, then having dmc ax ≥ 20

and dmv ax ≥ 20 results in the lower bound of (2) being larger

than

that

of

(5).

As

another

example,

for

rate-

1 20

codes

with

λ = 3 and μ = 3.158, the lower bound of (2) is larger than

that of (5) if dcmax ≥ 8, dvmax ≥ 8 and m ≥ 650.

Fig. 13. The Heawood graph.

Remark 2: In Lemma 3 of [2], Hu et al. derived an upper

bound on the girth of a general bi-regular Tanner graph.

We note that, compared to the upper bound of [2], the upper

bound of (2) is not only applicable to the more general

category of irregular graphs, but also is tighter for bi-regular

graphs.

Example 2: In this example, we consider the construction

of a bi-regular Tanner graph with n = 4000, m = 2000,

dv = 3 and dc = 6. Using Algorithm 1 with Steps 6 and 7, we are able to construct such a Tanner graph with g = 10.

Using the PEG algorithm, on the other hand, if we restrict the

degree of all check nodes to be exactly 6, we obtain a Tanner

graph with g = 6. If we remove this restriction, and only aim

at maintaining a rather uniform degree distribution for check

nodes in the PEG algorithm, the girth is increased to 10. The

resultant graph, however, in addition to 1888 check nodes of

degree 6, has 56 check nodes of degree 5 and 56 check nodes

of degree 7.

Example 3: The Heawood graph [68], shown in Fig. 13,

is a 3-regular bipartite graph with n = m = 7 and g = 6.

An important property of this graph is that, among all the

3-regular graphs with g = 6, it has the fewest number of

nodes, i.e., the Heawood graph is a (3; 6)-cage. We first use

PEG algorithm to construct a bipartite graph with n = m = 7

and dv = dc = 3. As a result, we obtain a graph with g = 4

that has the following bi-adjacency matrix:

⎡

⎤

1010010

P1

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢00110

0 0 1 1 1

0 0 1 0 0

1 0 0 1 0

0 1 0 0 1

1 0 0 1 0

10101⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

.

0011100

We then use the proposed 2-switching technique to construct a bipartite graph with n = m = 7 and dv = dc = 3, and are able to construct the Heawood graph as a result. This demonstrates the strength of the proposed technique in constructing bipartite graphs with maximum girth.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied the computational complexity of problems related to finding simple bipartite graphs with a small number of short cycles. Within this context, we identified two problems, each at one extreme of the complexity spectrum.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6034

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 66, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

In one extreme, we proved that the problem of finding a simple bipartite graph with degree sequences (π, π ) and the number of 4-cycles (6-cycles and 8-cycles) less than or equal to some integers α (β and γ, respectively) is NP-hard. In the other extreme, we showed that the problem of finding a bipartite graph with a given variable degree sequence and girth of at least six is solvable in polynomial time. In addition, we devised a quasi-polynomial time algorithm, based on 2-switchings, that can increase the girth of a simple bipartite graph with given degree sequences to a value that increases logarithmically with the size of the graph. By adding more steps involving random 2-switches to the proposed algorithm, we were able to increase the girth of the graph further. We demonstrated by some examples that the constructed graphs can in some cases have a larger girth compared to Tanner graphs constructed by the so-called PEG algorithm. This is particularly the case for scenarios where one is interested in strictly maintaining the degree sequences on both sides of the graph.
The problem of maximizing the girth of a bipartite graph for given degree sequences has been the subject of much research, particularly in the context of LDPC code design. The results of this work suggest that this problem is NP-hard. We also note that, in principle, 2-switches can be used to maximize the girth of bipartite graphs for a given number of nodes and degree sequences. In this context, devising an efficient algorithm for the selection of 2-switches with a guaranteed lower bound on the girth of the resulting graph would be an interesting topic for future research. Related to this, it is known that the problem of finding the minimum number of 2-switches for transforming a general graph G (not necessarily bipartite) into another general graph H is NP-hard [69]. An interesting problem would be to determine whether the problem of finding the minimum number of 2-switches for transforming a bipartite graph G into another bipartite graph H is also NP-hard.
Short cycles are part of dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes over different channels and for a variety of iterative decoding algorithms. The 2-switching can be potentially used to eliminate the dominant trapping sets of an LDPC code without affecting the code’s parameters such as the block length, the rate and the degree sequences. Devising efficient algorithms for this purpose with some performance guarantees would be interesting.

number of nodes of a graph with diameter φ = diam(G) [71]. Therefore, by (6) and the result of [71], we have the following upper bound:

diam(G)−1

m≤

(λ − 1) i/2 (μ − 1) i/2 .

(7)

i=0

By simplifying (7), we can obtain a lower bound on diam(G). To simplify the notation, in the following, we use d to denote diam(G). We also assume that d ≥ 2 (the case d = 1 is trivial). From (7), we have:

d−1
m ≤ (λ − 1) i/2 (μ − 1) i/2

i=0
=1 + (λ − 1) + (λ − 1)(μ − 1)

+ (λ − 1)2(μ − 1) + . . . + (λ − 1)

d−1 2

(μ − 1)

d−1 2

d 2

−1

=

(λ − 1)i(μ − 1)i + (λ − 1)i+1(μ − 1)i

i=0

+(

d 2

−

d 2

)(λ − 1)

d−1 2

(μ − 1)

d−1 2

d 2

−1

=

λ(λ − 1)i(μ − 1)i

i=0

+( d

−

d

)(λ − 1)

d−1 2

(μ − 1)

d−1 2

22

λ

[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

d 2

−1

=

(λ − 1)(μ − 1) − 1

+( d

−

d

)(λ − 1)

d−1 2

(μ − 1)

d−1 2

.

22

(8)

Now, we consider two cases based on whether d is even or odd.
(i) For d even, by (8), we have

λ

[(λ

−

1)(μ

−

1)]

d 2

−1

m≤

.

(9)

(λ − 1)(μ − 1) − 1

From (9), we obtain

log m ([(λ − 1)(μ − 1)] − 1) + 1

2

λ

≤ d . (10)

log[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

APPENDIX PROOF OF LEMMA 2

Let G be a bipartite graph with m check nodes and girth g = 2φ. Moreover, let μ and λ be the average check and variable node degrees of G, respectively. Hoory [70] presented the following lower bound on the number of check nodes in G:

φ−1

m ≥ (λ − 1) i/2 (μ − 1) i/2 .

(6)

i=0

The bound (6) can be viewed as a generalization of the Moore bound for regular graphs [70]. On the other hand, it is well known that in bipartite graphs, the Moore bound represents not only a lower bound on the number of nodes of a graph with girth 2φ, but also an upper bound on the

(ii) For d odd, by (8), we have

λ

[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

d 2

m≤

−1

+ (λ − 1)

d 2

(μ − 1)

d 2

.

(λ − 1)(μ − 1) − 1

(11)

On the other hand, since μ ≥ λ, we have

(λ − 1)d ≤ (λ − 1)

d 2

(μ − 1)

d 2

(λ − 1) ,

(12)

and since d ≥ 3 (d ≥ 2 and d is odd) and λ ≥ 2.33, we have

λ ≤ (λ − 1)d .

(13)

Putting (12) together with (13), we obtain

λ ≤ (λ − 1)

d 2

(μ − 1)

d 2

(λ − 1) ,

(14)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEHGHAN AND BANIHASHEMI: ON FINDING BIPARTITE GRAPHS WITH A SMALL NUMBER OF SHORT CYCLES AND LARGE GIRTH

6035

which can be rearranged to

(λ − 1)

d 2

(μ − 1)

d 2

≤λ

[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

d 2

−1

.

(15)

Now, from (11) and (15), we have

λ

[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

d 2

−1

m≤

(λ − 1)(μ − 1) − 1

[(λ − 1)(μ − 1) − 1]λ

[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

d 2

−1

+

(λ − 1)(μ − 1) − 1

(λ − 1)(μ − 1)λ

[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

d 2

−1

=

, (16)

(λ − 1)(μ − 1) − 1

which results in

log

m ([(λ − 1)(μ − 1)] − 1) + 1
(λ−1)(μ−1)λ
log[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

≤

d 2 . (17)

By further manipulation of (17), we obtain

log

m ([(λ − 1)(μ − 1)] − 1) + 1
λ
log[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

−1≤

d 2

.

(18)

Now, considering that d is odd, we have d/2 = (d − 1)/2. By replacing this in (18), we obtain

log m ([(λ − 1)(μ − 1)] − 1) + 1

2

λ

− 1 ≤ d . (19)

log[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

By (10) and (19), we can thus conclude that for both even and odd values of d = diam(G),

log m ([(λ − 1)(μ − 1)] − 1) + 1

2

λ

− 1 ≤ diam(G) . (20)

log[(λ − 1)(μ − 1)]

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Conf. Rec. (ICC), Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 2001, pp. 41–44.
[2] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[3] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[4] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, Dec. 2004.
[5] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, “Generalized ACE constrained progressive edge-growth LDPC code design,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 32–34, Jan. 2008.
[6] X. Zheng, F. C. M. Lau, and C. K. Tse, “Constructing short-length irregular LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 2823–2834, Oct. 2010.
[7] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, “Evaluation and design of irregular LDPC codes using ACE spectrum,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2272–2278, Aug. 2009.
[8] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Design of finite-length irregular protograph codes with low error floors over the binary-input AWGN channel using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 902–907, Apr. 2012.
[9] H. Xiao and A. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels using cycle enumeration,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1550–1555, Jun. 2009.
[10] M. E. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic construction of sparse matrices with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718–727, Feb. 2006.

[11] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V. Satyukov, “Searching for voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2265–2279, Apr. 2012.
[12] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On the girth of quasi-cyclic protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4542–4552, Jul. 2013.
[13] A. Tasdighi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M.-R. Sadeghi, “Efficient search of girth-optimal QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1552–1564, Apr. 2016.
[14] M. Battaglioni, A. Tasdighi, G. Cancellieri, F. Chiaraluce, and M. Baldi, “Design and analysis of time-invariant SC-LDPC convolutional codes with small constraint length,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 918–931, Mar. 2018.
[15] M. H. Tadayon, A. Tasdighi, M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and F. Chiaraluce, “Efficient search of compact QC-LDPC and SC-LDPC convolutional codes with large girth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1156–1159, Jun. 2018.
[16] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[17] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[18] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[19] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[20] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization of elementary trapping sets in irregular LDPC codes and the corresponding efficient exhaustive search algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3411–3430, May 2018.
[21] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Estimation of bit and frame error rates of finite-length low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2234–2239, Dec. 2007.
[22] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[23] A. Tomasoni, S. Bellini, and M. Ferrari, “Thresholds of absorbing sets in low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 3238–3249, Aug. 2017.
[24] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115–1131, Jun. 2004.
[25] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[26] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[27] K. M. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of a tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2278–2280, Jun. 2007.
[28] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4167–4178, Sep. 2009.
[29] S. Abu-Surra, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Enumerators for protograph-based ensembles of LDPC and generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 858–886, Feb. 2011.
[30] E. Rosnes, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “On the Minimum/Stopping distance of array low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5204–5214, Sep. 2014.
[31] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization and efficient search of non-elementary trapping sets of LDPC codes with applications to stopping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 1017–1033, Feb. 2019.
[32] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “Asymptotic average multiplicity of structures within different categories of trapping sets, absorbing sets, and stopping sets in random regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 6022–6043, Oct. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 66, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2020

[33] B. Amiri, C.-W. Lin, and L. Dolecek, “Asymptotic distribution of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets for regular sparse code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 455–464, Feb. 2013.
[34] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hardness results on finding leafless elementary trapping sets and elementary absorbing sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 4307–4315, Jul. 2019.
[35] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Lower bounds on the size of smallest elementary and non-elementary trapping sets in variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1905–1908, Sep. 2017.
[36] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “From cages to trapping sets and codewords: A technique to derive tight upper bounds on the minimum size of trapping sets and minimum distance of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 2062–2074, Apr. 2019.
[37] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[38] S. Khazraie, R. Asvadi, and A. H. Banihashemi, “A PEG construction of finite-length LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1288–1291, Aug. 2012.
[39] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasic, “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012.
[40] X. Tao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, and Z. Hu, “On the construction of LDPC codes free of small trapping sets by controlling cycles,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 9–12, Jan. 2018.
[41] S. Naseri and A. H. Banihashemi, “Construction of Girth-8 QC-LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1904–1908, Nov. 2019.
[42] S. Naseri and A. H. Banihashemi, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes with small constraint length and low error floor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 254–258, Feb. 2020.
[43] B. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Construction of QC LDPC codes with low error floor by efficient systematic search and elimination of trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 697–712, Feb. 2020.
[44] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[45] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Influence of proto-and Tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 585–607, Feb. 2012.
[46] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Tight lower and upper bounds on the minimum distance of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 33–36, Jan. 2018.
[47] M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and G. Cancellieri, “Connections between low-weight codewords and cycles in spatially coupled LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 3268–3280, Aug. 2018.
[48] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “An algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 287–292, Jan. 2006.
[49] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Message-passing algorithms for counting short cycles in a graph,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 485–495, Feb. 2013.
[50] I. F. Blake and S. Lin, “On short cycle enumeration in biregular bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 6526–6535, Oct. 2018.

[51] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “On the tanner graph cycle distribution of random LDPC, random protograph-based LDPC, and random quasi-cyclic LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 4438–4451, Jun. 2018.
[52] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “On computing the multiplicity of cycles in bipartite graphs using the degree distribution and the spectrum of the graph,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3778–3789, Jun. 2019.
[53] Z. Chen and S. Bates, “Construction of low-density parity-check convolutional codes through progressive edge-growth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1058–1060, Dec. 2005.
[54] M.-R. Sadeghi, A. H. Banihashemi, and D. Panario, “Low-density paritycheck lattices: Construction and decoding analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 4481–4495, Oct. 2006.
[55] C. T. Healy and R. C. de Lamare, “Decoder-optimised progressive edge growth algorithms for the design of LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 889–892, Jun. 2012.
[56] H. Park, S. Hong, J.-S. No, and D.-J. Shin, “Design of multipleedge protographs for QC LDPC codes avoiding short inevitable cycles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4598–4614, Jul. 2013.
[57] X. Jiang, X.-G. Xia, and M. H. Lee, “Efficient progressive edge-growth algorithm based on chinese remainder theorem,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 442–451, Feb. 2014.
[58] X. He, L. Zhou, and J. Du, “A new multi-edge metric-constrained PEG algorithm for designing binary LDPC code with improved cycle-structure,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 14–25, Jan. 2018.
[59] X. He, L. Zhou, and J. Du, “PEG-like design of binary QC-LDPC codes based on detecting and avoiding generating small cycles,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1845–1858, May 2018.
[60] D. MacKay’s LDPC Code Resources. Accessed: Jan. 2019. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/
[61] H. Hulett, T. G. Will, and G. J. Woeginger, “Multigraph realizations of degree sequences: Maximization is easy, minimization is hard,” Oper. Res. Lett., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 594–596, Sep. 2008.
[62] N. S. Bhave, B. Y. Bam, and C. M. Deshpande, “A characterization of degree sequences of linear hypergraphs,” J. Indian Math. Soc., vol. 75, nos. 1–4, pp. 151–160, 2008.
[63] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 1963.
[64] D. B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1996.
[65] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd ed. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2009.
[66] R. Yuster and U. Zwick, “Finding even cycles even faster,” SIAM J. Discrete Math., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 209–222, May 1997.
[67] J. A. McGowan and R. C. Williamson, “Loop removal from LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ISIT), Mar. 2003, pp. 230–233.
[68] J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty, Graph Theory With Applications. New York, NY, USA: American Elsevier Publishing Co., 1976.
[69] S. Bereg and H. Ito, “Transforming graphs with the same graphic sequence,” J. Inf. Process., vol. 25, no. 0, pp. 627–633, 2017.
[70] S. Hoory, “The size of bipartite graphs with a given girth,” J. Combinat. Theory, Ser. B, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 215–220, Nov. 2002.
[71] M. Miller and J. Sirán, “Moore graphs and beyond: A survey of the degree/diameter problem,” Electron. J. Combinatorics, vol. 1000, p. DS14, May 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

