IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2013

1051

Using Quasi-EZ-NAND Flash Memory to Build Large-Capacity Solid-State
Drives in Computing Systems

design practice is subject to a critical issue: Those powerful ECC (e.g., low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [4]) and DSP (e.g., signal postcompensation/predistortion [5] for compensating cell-to-cell interference) may demand fine-grained memory cell

sensing (e.g., the threshold voltage of each 2 bit/cell memory cell is

Yangyang Pan, Student Member, IEEE, Guiqiang Dong, Student Member, IEEE,
Ningde Xie, and Tong Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE

quantized into 4 bits during memory sensing). This directly results in much higher flash-to-controller data transfer traffic and hence significantly degrades the SSD speed performance. In addition, as NAND flash memory I/O data transfer rate continues to increase and SSDs employ more NAND flash memory chips on each

channel to improve system performance, ECC and DSP modules

Abstract—Future flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs) must employ increasingly powerful error correction code (ECC) and digital signal processing (DSP) techniques to compensate the negative impact of technology scaling on NAND flash memory device reliability. Currently, all the ECC and DSP functions are

on the controller must meet very stringent speed requirement, which can make their silicon implementation a challenge.
Driven by the Open NAND Flash Interface (ONFI) working group [6], NAND flash memory manufacturers are currently

implemented in a central SSD controller. However, the use of more powerful ECC developing EZ-NAND (Error Zero NAND) flash memory, where

and DSP makes such design practice subject to significant speed performance all the ECC and DSP functions are embedded in each NAND flash

degradation and complicated controller implementation. An EZ-NAND (Error Zero NAND) flash memory design strategy is emerging in the industry, which moves all the ECC and DSP functions to each memory chip. Although EZ-NAND flash can simplify controller design and achieve high system speed performance, its high silicon cost may not be affordable for large-capacity SSDs in computing systems. We propose a quasi-EZ-NAND design strategy that hierarchically distributes ECC and DSP functions on both NAND flash memory chips and the central SSD controller. Compared with EZ-NAND design concept, it can maintain almost the

chip through die packaging. Although the EZ-NAND concept was proposed mainly for simplifying controller/host design, the use of EZ-NAND flash memory can meanwhile improve the SSD speed performance by reducing flash-to-controller data transfer traffic, i.e., NAND flash memory chips no longer need to transfer the ECC coding redundancy and any fine-grained memory sensing results to the controller. However, EZ-NAND flash memory chips may be

same speed performance while reducing silicon cost overhead. Assuming the use noticeably more expensive than conventional NAND flash

of low-density parity-check (LDPC) code and postcompensation DSP technique, memory chips, especially when very sophisticated ECC and DSP

trace-based simulations show that SSDs using quasi-EZ-NAND flash can realize almost the same speed as SSDs using EZ-NAND flash, and both can reduce the average SSD response time by over 90 percent compared with conventional design practice. Silicon design at 65 nm node shows that quasi-EZ-NAND can reduce the silicon cost overhead by up to 44 percent compared with EZ-NAND.

functions are being used. Although this may not be a critical issue for systems with one or few NAND flash memory chips (e.g., mobile phones), it may not be affordable for large-capacity SSDs consisting of tens or hundreds of NAND flash memory chips.
In this work, we propose a quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory

Index Terms—Flash memory, solid-state drive (SSD), ECC, LDPC

design strategy that, compared with EZ-NAND design concept, can maintain almost the same speed performance while largely

Ç
1 INTRODUCTION

reducing the cost overhead. Each quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory chip only incorporates relatively weak and hence less sophisticated ECC and DSP functions that can ensure data storage integrity with

THE steady bit cost reduction over the past decade has enabled NAND flash memory enter increasingly diverse applications, and it is now economically viable to implement large-capacity solidstate drives (SSDs) using NAND flash memory. However, as the semiconductor industry is aggressively pushing the scaling of NAND flash memory technology and the use of multilevel per cell (MLC) storage, NAND flash memory cells are subject to increasingly severe noise and distortion, in particular program/ erase (P/E) cycling effects [1] and cell-to-cell interference [2]. Therefore, in order to ensure system data storage integrity and maintain sufficient PE cycling endurance and data retention, increasingly powerful and sophisticated error correction code (ECC) and digital signal processing (DSP) techniques become indispensable in future SSDs [3].
Most SSDs use a dedicated central controller to control all the
NAND flash memory chips and handle I/O interface with the host.
In conventional design practice, all the ECC and DSP functions are
implemented in the SSD controller. Nevertheless, as more power-
ful ECC and DSP techniques are being used, such a conventional

a sufficiently high probability, and the central SSD controller contains the full-strength ECC and DSP functions that are executed only when the weak ECC and DSP within quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory chips fail. Such a hierarchical ECC and DSP implementation strategy is particularly effective for NAND flash memory, which can be explained as follows: NAND flash memory cell storage reliability gradually degrades with P/E cycling, and the full-strength ECC and DSP are geared to the worst case raw storage reliability as memory P/E cycling reaches the endurance limit. Therefore, the full-strength ECC and DSP are essentially stronger-than-enough for most of the time. As a result, the weak ECC and DSP can be more likely sufficient most of the time, especially during the early lifetime of NAND flash memory chips.
To quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of this proposed simple design concept, we assume that LDPC code and postcompensation signal processing technique are used in SSDs. Encouraged by the recent success of LDPC code in hard disk drive, the industry is very actively investigating its use for future NAND flash memory, and in the open literature the use of LDPC code in NAND flash memory has been recently discussed

[4]. The postcompensation technique has been proposed in [5] as

. Y. Pan, G. Dong, and T. Zhang are with the Electrical, Computer and an effective way to compensate cell-to-cell interference. To Systems Engineering Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), facilitate the quantitative evaluation, based upon extensive open

Troy, NY, 12180.

literature on flash memory devices, we develop an approximate

E-mail: {yyangpan, dongguiqiang}@gmail.com, tzhang@ecse.rpi.edu. . N. Xie is with Intel Corporation, Hillsboro, OR 97124.
E-mail: ningdexie@gmail.com.

NAND flash memory device model that quantitatively captures the P/E cycling effects and cell-to-cell interference. Using this memory cell device model and the SSD model [7] in DiskSim [8],

Manuscript received 1 Mar. 2011; revised 26 Aug. 2011; accepted 5 Feb. 2012; published online 21 Feb. 2012. Recommended for acceptance by L. Wang. For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:

we carry out extensive trace-based simulations, and the results clearly demonstrate that SSDs using quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory can achieve almost the same speed performance as SSDs

tc@computer.org, and reference IEEECS Log Number TC-2011-03-0138.

using EZ-NAND flash memory, and both can reduce the average

Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TC.2012.54.

SSD response time (including both write and read request response

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

0018-9340/13/$31.00 ß 2013 IEEE Published by the IEEE Computer Society

1052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2013

time) by over 90 percent compared with SSDs using conventional NAND flash memory. In addition, we carry out applicationspecific integrated circuit (ASIC) design at 65 nm node for LDPC decoders and postcompensation module, and the results show that the use of quasi-EZ-NAND flash can reduce the silicon area overhead by up to 44 percent compared with the use of EZ-NAND flash memory.

2 BACKGROUND
2.1 Memory Erase and Program Basics
Each NAND flash memory cell is a floating gate transistor whose threshold voltage can be programmed by injecting certain amount of charges into the floating gate. Before one memory cell can be programmed, it must be erased and the threshold voltage of erased memory cells tends to have a wide Gaussian-like distribution [9]. Hence, we can approximately model the erased state as

peðxÞ ¼ p1 ffiffiffiffiffi eÀðxÀ2e2eÞ2 ;

ð1Þ

e 2

power-law fashion, and scale with the retention time t in a logarithmic fashion. Moreover, the significance of threshold voltage reduction is also proportional to the initial threshold voltage magnitude.

2.3 Cell-to-Cell Interference

In NAND flash memory, the threshold voltage shift of one floating gate transistor can influence the threshold voltage of its neighboring floating gate transistors through parasitic capacitance-coupling effect [12], which is referred to as cell-to-cell interference. Threshold voltage shift of a victim cell caused by cellto-cell interference can be estimated as [12]:

F

¼

X ÀÁVtðkÞ

Á


ðkÞ

Á ;

ð4Þ

k

where ÁVtðkÞ represents the threshold voltage shift of one interfer-

ing cell which is programmed after the victim cell, and the coupling

ratio


ðkÞ

¼

CðkÞ Ctotal

in which CðkÞ

is the parasitic capacitance between

the interfering cell and the victim cell and Ctotal is the total

capacitance of the victim cell.

where e and e are the mean and standard deviation of the erased state threshold voltage. Regarding memory program, a tight

threshold voltage control is realized by incremental step pulse

program (ISPP), i.e., all the memory cells on the same word-line are

recursively programmed using a program-and-verify approach

with a stair case program word-line voltage Vpp. Let ÁVpp denote
the incremental program step voltage. For the kth programmed state with the verify voltage VpðkÞ, ideally ISPP program results in a uniform threshold voltage distribution for each programmed state:

8

ppðkÞðxÞ

¼

< :

1
ÁVpp 0;

;

if VpðkÞ else:

x

VpðkÞ þ ÁVpp

ð2Þ

2.4 An Approximate Memory Device Model

Based on the above discussions, we can approximately model

NAND flash memory device characteristics, using which we can

simulate memory cell threshold voltage distribution and obtain

memory raw storage reliability. Based upon (1) and (2), we

can obtain the distortion-less threshold voltage distribution

function ppðxÞ. Recall that prðxÞ denotes the RTN distribution

function (see (3)), and let parðxÞ denote the threshold voltage

distribution after incorporating RTN, which is obtained by

convoluting ppðxÞ and prðxÞ, i.e.,

O

parðxÞ ¼ ppðxÞ prðxÞ:

ð5Þ

Unfortunately, the above ideal memory cell threshold voltage distribution can be distorted in practice, mainly due to P/E cycling and cell-to-cell interference, which will be discussed in the remainder of this section.
2.2 Effects of P/E Cycling
Flash memory P/E cycling causes damage to the tunnel oxide of floating gate transistors in the form of charge trapping in the oxide and interface states [1], which directly results in threshold voltage shift and fluctuation and hence gradually degrades memory device noise margin. Major distortion sources include:
1. Electrons capture and emission events at charge trap sites near the interface developed over P/E cycling directly result in memory cell threshold voltage fluctuation, which is referred to as random telegraph noise (RTN) [10];
2. Interface trap recovery and electron detrapping [11]

Cell-to-cell interference is further incorporated based on (4). To

capture inevitable process variability, we set both the vertical and

diagonal coupling ratio 
y and 
xy as random variables with bounded Gaussian distributions:

8

pcðxÞ

¼

< :

pccffiffiffiffiffi c 2

Á

eÀðxÀ22cc Þ2

;

if jx À cj

wc

ð6Þ

0;

else;

where c and c are the mean and standard deviation, and cc is

chosen to ensure the integration of this bounded Gaussian

distribution equals to 1. We set wc ¼ 0:1 c and c ¼ 0:4 c in this

work. Let pac denote the threshold voltage distribution after

incorporating cell-to-cell interference, ptðxÞ denote the distribution

of threshold voltage reduction during retention, the final threshold

voltage distribution pf is obtained as

O

pf ðxÞ ¼ pacðxÞ ptðxÞ:

ð7Þ

gradually reduce memory cell threshold voltage, leading to the data retention limitation.
RTN causes memory cell threshold voltage random fluctuation with exponential decay. Hence, we model the probability density function prðxÞ of RTN-induced threshold voltage fluctuation as a symmetric exponential function [10]:

prðxÞ

¼

1 2r

e : Àjxrj

ð3Þ

3 PROPOSED QUASI-EZ-NAND FLASH MEMORY DESIGN STRATEGY
In conventional design practice of SSDs, all the ECC and DSP functions are implemented in the controller as illustrated in Fig. 1a. As more powerful and complicated ECC and DSP techniques are being used, such a conventional design practice can result in significant SSD speed performance degradation, i.e., advanced

Let N denote the P/E cycling number, r scales with N in an approximate power-law fashion, i.e., r / N.
Interface trap recovery and electron detrapping processes

ECC and DSP tend to demand fine-grained memory cell sensing, leading to much higher flash-to-controller data transfer latency and hence large SSD system speed performance degradation. Under

approximately follow Poisson statistics [1], hence threshold the emerging EZ-NAND flash design strategy, all the ECC and

voltage reduction due to interface trap recovery and electron DSP functions are embedded in each NAND flash chip. As a result,

detrapping can be approximately modeled as a Gaussian distribu- EZ-NAND flash memory chips always appear to be error-free to

tion N ðd; d2Þ. Both d and d2 scale with N in an approximate the external controller/host. As illustrated in Fig. 1b, in SSDs using
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2013

1053

Fig. 1. Structures of SSDs using (a) conventional NAND flash memory chips, (b) EZ-NAND flash memory chips, and (c) proposed quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory chips.

EZ-NAND flash memory, all the ECC and DSP functions are off-

full-strength ECC and DSP functions in the SSD

loaded from the controller to all the individual flash memory chips,

controller may not have to meet the system throughput

which can achieve much better system speed performance

requirement, which can be possibly leveraged to further

compared with conventional SSDs. However, as the ECC and

reduce the SSD controller silicon implementation cost.

DSP become increasingly sophisticated and induce higher silicon

Fig. 2 further shows the operational data flow diagram of all the

implementation cost, one EZ-NAND flash memory chip can be three scenarios discussed above. As shown in Figs. 2a and 2b,

noticeably more expensive than its conventional NAND flash when conventional NAND and ideal EZ-NAND flash memory

memory counterpart. As a result, large-capacity SSDs may not be able to afford the use of EZ-NAND flash memory chips.
In this work, we propose a quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory design strategy that can reduce the silicon cost overhead compared with EZ-NAND flash memory and meanwhile maintain almost the same SSD system speed performance. As illustrated in Fig. 1c, each quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory chip only incorporates relatively weak and hence less sophisticated ECC and DSP functions that can

chips are used, all the ECC and DSP functions are executed in the central SSD controller and in each flash memory chip, respectively. In the context of the proposed quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory, ECC and DSP are carried out hierarchically at both flash memory chip and controller: each quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory chip always executes embedded weak ECC and DSP functions to recover the user data, and only when it fails the SSD controller carries out the full-strength ECC and DSP.

ensure data storage integrity with a certain probability, and the

central SSD controller contains the full-strength ECC and DSP 4 EVALUATION METHODOLOGY

functions that are executed only when the weak ECC and DSP in quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory chips fail to recover the user data. The advantages of such a quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory design strategy can be intuitively justified as follows:

In this study, we set that SSDs use LDPC code and use the postcompensation technique to compensate the cell-to-cell interference. Targeting at 4k-byte user data per page, we construct a regular rate-9/10 quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) code with the

. It naturally matches to the NAND flash memory cell wear-out parity check matrix column weight of 4. The decoder uses the mindynamics. From the discussions in Section 2, it is clear that sum decoding algorithm [13] with up to eight decoding iterations. NAND flash memory cell raw storage reliability gradually LDPC code decoder carries out soft-decision decoding and its error degrades with the P/E cycling: During the early lifetime of correction capability heavily depends on the finite word-length memory cells (i.e., the P/E cycling number N is relatively precision of the input: As we increase finite word-length precision

small), the aggregated P/E cycling effects are relatively of the input data, LDPC decoder can achieve stronger error

less significant, which leads to a relatively large memory correction capability but will occupy larger silicon area and

cell storage noise margin and hence good raw storage consume more power. In this work, we set that the full-strength

reliability (i.e., low raw storage bit error rate); since the and weak LDPC decoder uses 5-bit and 1-bit input, respectively.

aggregated P/E cycling effects scale with N in approx-

The basic idea of postcompensation is simple [5]: If we know

imate power-law fashions, the memory cell storage noise the threshold voltage shift of interfering cells, we can estimate the

margin and hence raw storage reliability gradually corresponding cell-to-cell interference strength according to (4)

degrade as the P/E cycling number N increases. Given and subsequently subtract it from the sensed threshold voltage of

the target P/E cycling endurance limit (e.g., 10k P/E victim cells. To implement postcompensation signal processing,

cycling), the employed ECC and DSP should ensure the we have to sense the cells of both current wordline being read and

storage integrity as the P/E cycling reaches the endurance its adjacent interfering wordline, and the memory sensing should

limit. Therefore, in the presence of such memory cell wear- be carried out with a finer granularity. This clearly leads to a

out dynamics, the weak and hence less sophisticated ECC longer memory sensing latency, and longer flash-to-controller data

and DSP may have a very high probability to ensure the transfer latency if the finer-grained sensing results are sent to the

system data storage integrity for most of the memory SSD controller. We use “ðm þ nÞ-sensing” to denote the sensing

lifetime. This suggests that quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory scheme used in postcompensation, where each memory cell on the

chips can behave error-free for most of the memory current wordline and adjacent interfering wordline is sensed using

lifetime, and hence can obtain almost the same speed m and n bits, respectively. In this work, we set the maximum

improvement as suing EZ-NAND flash memory chips.

values of m and n as 5 and 4, respectively.

. It reduces the ECC and DSP silicon cost overhead. By only

In this study, we consider 2 bits/cell NAND flash memory. We

incorporating weak and less sophisticated ECC and DSP, set normalized e and e of the erased state as 0.35 and 1.4, each quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory chip induces less respectively. For the three programmed states, we set the normal-

silicon cost compared with its EZ-NAND flash memory ized program step voltage ÁVpp as 0.3, and the normalized verify

counterpart. Meanwhile, since the quasi-EZ-NAND flash voltages Vp as 2.55, 3.15, and 3.88, respectively. For the RTN
memory chips behave error-free most of the time, the distribution function prðxÞ, we set the parameter r ¼ K Á N0:5
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2013

Fig. 2. Operational data flow diagrams of SSDs using (a) conventional NAND flash memory, (b) EZ-NAND flash memory, and (c) proposed quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory.

where K ¼ 5 Â 10À4. Regarding cell-to-cell interference, according
to [14], we set the means of 
y and 
xy as 0.08 and 0.0048, respectively. For the function N ðd; d2Þ to capture interface trap recovery and electron detrapping, according to [1], we set that d scale with N0:5 and 2d scales with N0:6, and both scale with lnð1 þ t=t0Þ, where t denote the memory retention time and t0 is an initial time and can be set as 1 hour. Since both d and d2 also depend on the initial threshold voltage, we set that both
approximately scale Ksðx À x0Þ, where x is the initial threshold
voltage, and x0 and Ks are constants. Therefore, we have

the memory sensing latency and flash-to-controller data transfer latency, we need to develop appropriate memory sensing strategies. Intuitively, we can use a progressive memory sensing strategy to reduce the latency cost, i.e., we always start with an initial sensing configuration with less precision (e.g., (3 þ 2)sensing), based on which we carry out postcompensation and LDPC decoding, and only if LDPC decoding fails, we progressively increase the sensing precision and retry the decoding until LDPC decoding succeeds. As long as the initial sensing configuration can ensure sufficiently low LDPC decoding failure rate (e.g., 10À2 $ 10À3), the savings gained from less memory sensing

& d ¼ Ksðx À x0ÞKdN0:5 lnð1 þ t=t0Þ d2 ¼ Ksðx À x0ÞKmN0:6 lnð1 þ t=t0Þ;

precision can easily offset the extra latency due to the less frequent
ð8Þ fail-and-retry operations. In addition, since NAND flash memory device wears out gradually with the P/E cycling, we can

where we set Ks ¼ 0:388, x0 ¼ 1:4, Kd ¼ 2:4 Â 10À4, and Km ¼ 2:4 Â 10À6 by fitting the measurement data presented in [1]. Targeting at page error rate (PER) below 10À15, we estimate that the use of full-strength 5-bit-precision LDPC decoding and postcompensation with (5 þ 4)-sensing can achieve P/E cycling endurance of 10k with retention of 10 years. For the three SSD
implementation scenarios, we have:

dynamically adjust the initial sensing configuration adaptive to the P/E cycling number. Therefore, we use a P/E-cycling-aware progressive memory sensing strategy in our evaluation.
Using the SSD module [7] in DiskSim [8], we carry out tracebased simulations to evaluate these design strategies under realistic workloads including Postmark [7], Finance1 and Finance2 from [15], and Trace1 from [16]. Each NAND flash memory chip contains two dies that share an 8-bit I/O bus and a number of

common control signals, and each die contains four planes and . SSDs using conventional NAND flash memory. The SSD each plane contains 2,048 blocks. Following the ONFI 2.0
controller contains a set of 5-bit-precision LDPC decoders specification [17], we set the NAND flash memory chip interface and postcompensation circuits with (5 þ 4)-sensing, and bus bandwidth as 133 MB/s. We set the NAND flash memory

each set handles one SSD channel.

program latency as 800 s and erase latency as 3 ms, and due to the

. SSDs using EZ-NAND flash memory. Each flash memory fully serial nature of memory sensing (i.e., the m-bit sensing

chip has its own set of 5-bit-precision LDPC decoder latency is roughly proportional to 2m À 1), we set the latency for

and postcompensation module with (5 þ 4)-sensing, and 2-bit sensing, 3-bit sensing, 4-bit sensing, and 5-bit sensing as 25.7,

the SSD controller does not implement any ECC and 60, 128.6, and 265:7 s, respectively.

DSP functions.

. SSDs using quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory. Each flash
memory chip has its own set of 1-bit-precision LDPC 5 SIMULATION RESULTS

decoder and postcompensation circuits with (5 þ 4)-sen- 5.1 Advantages of Integrating P/E Cycling Awareness in

sing, and the SSD controller contains a set of 5-bit-precision

Progressive Memory Sensing

LDPC decoders. We keep the full-strength postcompensation function in each flash chip since it consumes much less silicon cost compared with LDPC decoder.

As we pointed out in Section 4, in order to exploit the NAND flash memory cell wear out dynamics, we dynamically adjust the initial sensing configuration in progressive memory sensing adaptive to

Since LDPC decoder and postcompensation demand finer- P/E cycling number. In this work, we first quantitatively evaluate

grained memory sensing and the sensing precision directly affects the potential gains when integrating the P/E cycling awareness in
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2013
TABLE 1 Five-bit LDPC Decoding Page Error Rate under Different
Sensing Configurations and P/E Cycling Numbers

1055
TABLE 2 One-bit LDPC Decoding Page Error Rate under Different
Sensing Configurations and P/E Cycling Numbers

Fig. 3. Simulated normalized average response time when using P/E-cyclingaware progressive memory sensing and each SSD channel contains four flash chips.

Fig. 5. Average SSD response time reduction.
Based on the above simulation results, we can obtain the average response time reduction over the baseline scenario with fixed initial (4 þ 1)-sensing as shown in Fig. 4. Intuitively, those traces with higher read request ratios (e.g., postmark and Trace1) tend to benefit more from the integration of P/E cycling awareness, as demonstrated in Fig. 4.

5.2 SSD Speed Performance

We further carry out trace-based simulations to evaluate and

compare the speed performance of SSDs using conventional

NAND flash memory, EZ-NAND flash memory, and quasi-EZ-

NAND flash memory, respectively. The P/E-cycling-aware pro-

gressive memory sensing strategy is used in all of the simulations.

Fig. 4. Comparison of average response time reduction by integrating P/E cycling awareness into the progressive memory sensing.

For SSDs using conventional NAND flash memory and EZ-NAND flash memory, where 5-bit-precision LDPC decoding is always executed, we obtain the initial sensing configurations based upon

progressive memory sensing. Here, we use SSDs with conventional NAND flash memory chips as a test vehicle. To set up the appropriate memory sensing configurations, we carry out finite precision C simulations and obtain the 5-bit-precision LDPC decoding page error rate under different sensing configurations and P/E cycling numbers as listed in Table 1.
Therefore, given the target 10k P/E cycling endurance limit, if

Table 1 in the above, i.e., we should use (3 þ 1)-sensing, (3 þ 2)sensing, (3 þ 2)-sensing, (4 þ 1)-sensing, and (4 þ 1)-sensing as the initial sensing configuration during the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth 2,000 P/E cyclings, respectively. For SSDs using quasiEZ-NAND flash memory, where 1-bit-precision LDPC decoding is executed first, we carry out corresponding finite precision C simulations and obtain the 1-bit-precision LDPC decoding page

we adjust the initial sensing configuration every 2,000 P/E cycles, error rate under different sensing configurations and P/E cycling

we should use ð3 þ 1Þ-sensing, ð3 þ 2Þ-sensing, ð3 þ 2Þ-sensing, numbers as listed in Table 2. Accordingly, we should use ð3 þ 2Þ-

ð4 þ 1Þ-sensing, and ð4 þ 1Þ-sensing during the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth 2,000 P/E cyclings, respectively. For the purpose of comparison, we set the baseline scenario as the case of using progressive memory sensing without any adaptation to P/E cycling. Hence, the initial memory sensing configuration in the baseline scenario is fixed as ð4 þ 1Þ-sensing throughout the memory lifetime.
We carry out DiskSim-based simulations to evaluate the average SSD response time (including both write and read request response time) with and without P/E cycling awareness in the progressive memory sensing. We use the first-come first-serve (FCFS) scheduling policy in the simulations. Since the SSD channel parallelism (i.e., the number of NAND flash memory chips on each SSD channel) can affect the SSD speed performance, we consider the scenarios when each SSD channel has four NAND flash

sensing, ð4 þ 1Þ-sensing, ð4 þ 1Þ-sensing, ð4 þ 1Þ-sensing, and ð4 þ 2Þ-sensing as the initial sensing configuration during the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth 2,000 P/E cyclings, respectively.
Using SSDs with conventional NAND flash memory as the baseline scenario, Fig. 5 shows the simulated average SSD response time reduction when each SSD channel contains four NAND flash memory chips. As pointed out in the above, the proposed quasi-EZNAND flash memory design strategy aims to achieve almost the same SSD speed performance as the ideal EZ-NAND flash memory at less silicon cost. The results shown in Fig. 5 clearly demonstrate that SSDs using either EZ-NAND flash memory or quasi-EZNAND flash memory have almost the same average response time. Compared with the baseline scenario, SSDs using either EZ-NAND flash memory or quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory can reduce the

memory chips. The results as shown in Fig. 3 clearly suggest the average response time by up to 92, 94, and 96 percent, when each

advantage of integrating P/E cycling awareness.

SSD channel contains 4, 8, and 16 memory chips. The results also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2013

Fig. 7. Aggregated silicon area of LDPC decoders and postcompensation modules under different SSD channel parallelism when SSDs contain five channels.

Fig. 6. Average response time reduction over the baseline scenario with fixed initial (4 þ 1)-sensing configuration in progressive memory sensing.

products that aim to remove the burden of the host controller and to improve the performance of the system. Carla [19] demonstrated the potential advantages of using EZ-NAND flash memory and

show that using more memory chips on each SSD channel can directly improve the SSD speed performance, which can be intuitively justified.
In addition, Fig. 6 shows SSD speed improvement when the fixed initial (4 þ 1)-sensing is used in the baseline scenario. The results show that, by integrating P/E cycling awareness in the progressive memory sensing, we can further improve the average

also compared the performance gain of copyback enabled by EZ-NAND with convectional NAND without copyback. Feeley [3] proposed emerging architectures of EZ-NAND and compared the speed performance of conventional NAND and EZ-NAND. However, for high-capacity SSDs that contains many NAND flash memory chips, the use of EZ-NAND flash memory chips can result in nonnegligible extra silicon cost.

response time reduction gained from using either EZ-NAND or

quasi-EZ-NAND design strategy up to about 93, 96, and 98 percent 7 CONCLUSION

when each SSD channel contains 4, 8 and 16 memory chips, respectively.

This paper presents a quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory design strategy that can enable the economic use of powerful ECC and

5.3 Silicon Area of EZ-NAND versus Quasi-EZ-NAND

DSP functions in future large-capacity SSDs at low silicon cost

The above simulation results show that the proposed quasi-EZNAND flash memory design strategy indeed can maintain almost the same speed performance as the EZ-NAND flash memory design strategy. To evaluate the silicon cost advantage of quasi-EZNAND over EZ-NAND, we further carry out ASIC design using 65 nm CMOS standard cell and SRAM libraries, where Synopsys tools are used throughout the design hierarchy down to place and route. The LDPC decoder is implemented using the partially parallel decoder architecture presented in [18]. Results show that, to achieve 2 Gbps decoding throughput, each 5-bit-precision LDPC decoder occupies 1:47 mm2 (0:66 mm2 of SRAM and 0:81 mm2 of

overhead. Strategy hierarchically distributes ECC and DSP functions on both NAND flash memory chips and SSD controller. Compared with the emerging EZ-NAND design strategy, it can maintain almost the same speed performance while noticeably reducing silicon cost overhead. Simulation results show that SSD using quasi-EZ-NAND flash can maintain the same speed as SSDs using EZ-NAND flash and both can reduce the average SSD response time by over 90 percent compared with SSDs using conventional NAND flash. ASIC design results demonstrate that, compared with the case of using EZ-NAND flash, the use of quasiEZ-NAND can reduce the silicon cost overhead by up to 44 percent.

logic), each 1-bit-precision LDPC decoder occupies 0:61 mm2

(0:40 mm2 of SRAM and 0:21 mm2 of logic), and each postcompensation module occupies 0:27 mm2.
Fig. 7 shows the aggregated silicon area of LDPC decoders and postcompensation modules under different SSD channel paralle-

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based in part upon work supported by US National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Number CCF-0937794.

lism when SSDs contain five channels. The results show that, by

using quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory instead of EZ-NAND flash memory, we can reduce the silicon cost by 28.3, 38.8, and 44.1 percent when each SSD channel contains 4, 8, and 16 NAND

REFERENCES
[1] N. Mielke, H. Belgal, I. Kalastirsky, P. Kalavade, A. Kurtz, Q. Meng, N. Righos, and J. Wu, “Flash EEPROM Threshold Instabilities due to Charge

flash memory chips. Therefore, the results above clearly demon-

Trapping During Program/Erase Cycling,” IEEE Trans. Device and Materials

strate that, compared with EZ-NAND flash memory, our proposed

Reliability, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 335-344, Sept. 2004.

quasi-EZ-NAND flash memory design strategy can noticeably

[2]

K. Kim et al., “Future Memory Technology: Challenges and Opportunities,” Proc. Int’l Symp. VLSI Technology, Systems and Applications, pp. 5-9, Apr.

reduce the silicon cost while maintaining almost the same SSD

2008.

speed performance.

[3] P. Feeley, “Nand Flash Scaling is EZ,” Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2010.

[4] Y. Maeda and H. Kaneko, “Error Control Coding for Multilevel Cell Flash

6 RELATED WORK

Memories Using Nonbinary Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Proc. 24th IEEE Int’l Symp. Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI Systems, pp. 367-375, Oct.

As technology continues to scale down, future NAND flash

[5]

2009. G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using Data Post-Compensation and Pre-

memories demand the use of more powerful and sophisticated

Distortion to Tolerate Cell-to-Cell Interference in MLC NAND Flash

ECC and DSP to ensure the data storage integrity. Maeda and

Memory,” Trans. Circuits and Systems-I: Regular Papers, vol. 57, pp. 2718-

Kaneko [4] proposed to apply LDPC in future MLC NAND flash

[6]

2728, 2010. GlobeNewswire, http://www.globenewswire.com/newsroom/news.

memories. The industry is developing EZ-NAND flash memory

html?d=180990, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2013
[7] N. Agrawal, V. Prabhakaran, T. Wobber, J.D. Davis, M. Manasse, and R. Panigrahy, “Design Tradeoffs for SSD Performance,” Proc. USENIX Ann. Technical Conf., pp. 57-70, 2008.
[8] J.S. Bucy, J. Schindler, S.W. Schlosser, and G.R. Ganger, “The DiskSim Simulation Environment Version 4.0 Reference Manual,” Technical Report CMU-PDL-08-101, Carnegie Mellon Univ., Parallel Data Laboratory, May 2008.
[9] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and H. Nakamura, “A Double-Level-Vth Select Gate Array Architecture for Multilevel NAND Flash Memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 602-609, Apr. 1996.
[10] C.M. Compagnoni, M. Ghidotti, A.L. Lacaita, A.S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Random Telegraph Noise Effect on the Programmed Threshold-Voltage Distribution of Flash Memories,” IEEE Electron Device Letters, vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 984-986, Sept. 2009.
[11] N. Mielke, H.P. Belgal, A. Fazio, Q. Meng, and N. Righos, “Recovery Effects in the Distributed Cycling of Flash Memories,” Proc. IEEE Int’l Reliability Physics Symp., pp. 29-35, 2006.
[12] J.-D Lee, S.-H. Hur, and J.-D. Choi, “Effects of Floating-Gate Interference on NAND Flash Memory Cell Operation,” IEEE Electron Device Letters, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264-266, May 2002.
[13] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M.P.C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288-1299, Aug. 2005.
[14] K. Prall, “Scaling Non-Volatile Memory Below 30 nm,” Proc. IEEE NonVolatile Semiconductor Memory Workshop, pp. 5-10, Aug. 2007.
[15] Storage Performance Council, “SPC Trace File Format Specification,”technical report, Revision 1.0.1, http://traces.cs.umass.edu/index.php/ Storage/Storage, 2002.
[16] C. Dirik and B. Jacob, “The Performance of PC Solid-State Disks (SSDs) as a Function of Bandwidth, Concurrency, Device Architecture, and System Organization,” SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 279289, 2009.
[17] Hynix Semiconductor, et al., “Open NAND Flash Interface Specification,”technical report, 2009.
[18] H. Zhong, W. Xu, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Area-Efficient Min-Sum Decoder Design for High-Rate Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes in Magnetic Recording,” IEEE Trans. Magnetics, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117-4122, Dec. 2007.
[19] C. Lay, “Improving NAND Performance Using Upcoming Feature,” Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2010.
. For more information on this or any other computing topic, please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/publications/dlib.

1057

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:30:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

