Proceedings of 13th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT 2010) 23-25 December, 2010, Dhaka, Bangladesh

Construction of a Multi-Level Hierarchical Quasi-Cyclic Matrix with Layered Permutation for Partially-Parallel LDPC Decoders

Vikram Arkalgud Chandrasetty and Syed Mahfuzul Aziz School of Electrical & Information Engineering, University of South Australia,
Mawson Lakes, SA 5095, Australia vikramac@ieee.org, mahfuz.aziz@unisa.edu.au

Abstract Implementation of partially-parallel (Low-Density Parity-Check) LDPC decoders using unstructured random matrices is very complex and requires huge hardware resources. To alleviate the complexity and minimize resource requirements, structured LDPC matrices are used. This paper presents a novel technique for constructing a multi-level Hierarchical Quasi-Cyclic (HQC) structured matrix for LDPC decoders. A unique multi-level structure of the proposed matrix provides flexibility in generating different code lengths and code rates for various applications such as WiMAX, WLAN and DVB-S2. In addition, different combinations of permuted sub-matrices are inserted in layers, to provide virtual randomness in the LDPC matrix. Simulations results show that the HQC matrices generated using the proposed technique have a marginal loss of less than 0.1 dB at a bit error rate (BER) performance of 10-5, compared to unstructured random matrices. The proposed matrix therefore provides BER performance close to random matrices while significantly reducing hardware resource requirements.
Keywords: cyclic codes, digital communication, error correction codes, flexible structures, WLAN.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have emerged as one of the most popular forward error correcting (FEC) technique that can achieve bit error rate (BER) performance close to Shannon Limit [1]. The inherent structure of the LDPC matrix provides high degree of parallelism and flexibility for designing a decoder for various applications – Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX), Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) and Digital Video Broadcasting - Satellite - Second Generation (DVB-S2) [2]. A fully-parallel architecture implementation of an LDPC decoder provides very high throughput but requires large hardware resources to achieve this performance [3]. Also, the complexity of the decoder increases drastically with longer code lengths. Therefore, an alternate solution to this problem is to use a resource efficient partially-parallel architecture [4]. This architecture uses only a few number of decoding nodes and reuses them iteratively in the process. Unlike that in a fully-parallel decoder, it

also utilizes block memories (in an FPGA) to store and access intermediate extrinsic messages. However, the advantages of a partially-parallel architecture are achieved by sacrificing the throughput of the decoder due to additional clock cycles required for processing [5].
A partially-parallel decoding architecture provides a trade-off between hardware requirements and throughput. The number of parallel nodes (check node and variable node) required by the decoder is based on the partition size of the matrix (also known as the base matrix). Also, the complexity of the addressing scheme required for handling intermediate messages substantially depends on the structure of the LDPC matrix. Therefore, the hardware requirement of a partially-parallel architecture based decoder predominantly relies on the structure and complexity of the LDPC matrix [6]. In order to alleviate the complexity of the decoder, structured Quasi-Cyclic (QC) [7] based matrix construction methods are widely used. This technique constructs an LDPC matrix by using an array of cyclically-shifted base matrices [8]. The parallelism factor of partially-parallel decoder architecture is normally defined by the size of the base matrix. Hierarchical QC (HQC) [9] matrixes are constructed with several levels of sub-matrices, with the last level corresponding to the base matrix. HQC based technique has the flexibility for constructing LDPC matrices of variable code lengths and code rates [10]. However, not all QC based matrix leads to comparable decoding performance (BER and average iterations) to that of unstructured matrices [8]. Therefore, constructing an LDPC matrix that reduces the complexity of partially-parallel decoder and also achieve optimum decoding performance is a challenge.
This paper presents a 3-Level HQC (3L-HQC) matrix construction technique. The 3-Levels of hierarchy in the matrix provide flexibility of generating LDPC codes of different code lengths and code rates. The matrix can also be easily configured for applications such as WiMAX, WLAN and DVB-S2. The proposed 3L-HQC consists of a permuted matrix in the level-2 of the hierarchical structure. Different combinations of permuted matrices are inserted in layers of the LDPC matrix to provide randomness in the matrix structure. Simulation results show that the proposed matrix has a marginal degradation in BER performance compared to

978-1-4244-8494-2/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

131

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:29:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the unstructured random matrices. It also outperforms the 2-Level HQC based LDPC decoders [9]. Hardware implementation of a partially-parallel architecture using the proposed 3L-HQC matrix can lead to significant reduction in memory requirements of the decoder.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A brief overview of unstructured and structured LDPC matrices along with decoder implementation complexity is presented in section II. In section III, the construction and performance analysis of the proposed matrix is presented. Applicability of the proposed matrix for various applications is also presented.
II. STRUCTURE OF LDPC MATRICES As stated earlier, the structure of the matrix plays a vital role in performance and implementation complexity of an LDPC decoder, especially for partially-parallel architectures [6]. The following subsections present an overview and comparison of the structured and unstructured matrices:
A. Unstructured Matrices An unstructured LDPC matrix is a sparse matrix
having the non-zero elements arranged in a random pattern. Sample of an unstructured matrix is shown in Fig. 1(a). Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) is one of the popular algorithms used to construct unstructured matrices [11]. The algorithms just aim to obtain matrices with large girths and can construct matrices of virtually any size. Due to the possibility of generating matrices with large girths, unstructured matrices exhibit good decoding performance [12]. These matrices can be used to design both fully-parallel and partially-parallel architectures for LDPC decoder. However, due to the randomness (complex node inter-connections) in the structure of the matrix, the implementation of both the architectures becomes substantially complex, especially for large code lengths. A simple block diagram of typical partially-parallel architecture of an LDPC decoder using unstructured matrix is shown in Fig. 1(b). Note that an exclusive memory is required to store the inter-connect information (LDPC matrix) for decoding.
(a) Sample of an unstructured LDPC matrix

(b) A simple block diagram of a partially-parallel architecture using unstructured matrix
Fig. 1. Example of an LDPC decoder architecture using unstructured matrix
B. Structured Matrices
A structured LDPC matrix is constructed in such a way that the position of non-zero elements in the matrix is deterministic. In other words, the organization of the matrix follows a logical pattern. Quasi-Cyclic (QC) based matrices are the most popular class of structured matrices [8]. QC based LDPC matrices are constructed by cyclic shift of the sub-matrices. The sub-matrix is normally an identity matrix. A sample of a QC based structured matrix is shown in Fig. 2 (a). QC based LDPC matrices can be used for fully-parallel decoders, but are highly suitable for partially-parallel decoder architectures [13]. A simple block diagram of a typical partially-parallel decoder architecture using structured matrix is shown in Fig. 2(b). The size of the sub-matrix determines the parallelism factor of the partially-parallel decoder architecture, which is the number of check nodes and variable nodes required to process in parallel. Since the non-zero elements in the QC matrix follow a logical pattern, the addressing scheme for handling intermediate node messages can be implemented logically. It eliminates the memory requirement to store the inter-connect information in case of an unstructured random LDPC matrix. Hence, the partitioning of the QC matrix using sub-matrices and the logical organization of the non-zero elements substantially alleviates the complexity of the partially-parallel LDPC decoder.
Although structured QC matrices provide a number of advantages for implementing an LDPC decoder, the decoding performances is limited when compared to unstructured random matrices [8]. This is due to the limitation in constructing QC matrices with large girth. However, the performance can be improved by using PEG based QC matrix [14] and Hierarchical QC (HQC) LDPC matrices [9].
The HQC based technique provides greater flexibility for partitioning the matrix into sub-matrices when compared to PEG based QC method. Also the former has completely deterministic pattern of non-zero elements arranged in the LDPC matrix. A 2-Level HQC (2L-HQC) matrix consists of a core matrix expanded by

132 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:29:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

two matrices forming a 2-Level hierarchical structure. Construction of a 2L-HQC matrix is presented in [9].
(a) Sample of a structured LDPC matrix
(b) A simple block diagram of a partially-parallel architecture using structured matrix
Fig. 2. Example of an LDPC decoder architecture using structured matrix
III. PROPOSED 3-LEVEL HQC LDPC MATRIX QC based techniques are less flexible for constructing matrices of variable sizes, when compared to unstructured matrices. This limitation is due to the use of array of sub-matrices that are fixed in size. The proposed technique is flexible for constructing matrices by exploiting the advantages of using HQC methods. It uses 3-Levels of hierarchy to efficiently organize the structure and construct flexible matrices with variable code lengths/rates. Also, Permuted sub-matrices are inserted in layers of the LDPC matrix. This introduces a sort of virtual randomness in the matrix similar to that of unstructured matrices, to improve the decoding performance. The following sub-sections present a detailed explanation on the construction and analysis of the proposed technique: A. Structure of the Matrix In order to illustrate the matrix construction process, a ½ rate (3, 6) regular LDPC matrix is considered in this example. A simple structure of the proposed 3L-HQC matrix is shown in Fig. 3. Level-1: The proposed matrix has 3-Levels of hierarchy. The first level of matrix in the hierarchy is termed as the Core matrix. This level is responsible for

maintaining the rate and regularity of the LDPC matrix. For example, in case of ½ rate (3, 6) regular LDPC code configuration, the Core matrix (H) consists of 3 rows and 6 columns (see Fig. 3). Further down the matrix construction process, each of the elements in the Core matrix that are expanded maintains a regularity of (1, 1). Thus retains the overall regularity of (3, 6) in the LDPC matrix.
Level-2: The second level of the matrix is obtained by expanding each of the elements in the Core matrix with a circularly shifted identity matrix (L) of size ‘N’. This matrix (L) is again expanded by placing an array of circularly shifted Permuted matrices (Rx) of size ‘R’. A Permuted matrix is constructed by placing a positive integer value randomly in the matrix. Examples of typical integer values are shown as subscript of ‘I’ in Fig. 3. This level of the matrix structure is predominantly responsible for expansion and construction of LDPC matrices with various code lengths for a particular application.
Note that different combinations of Permuted matrices are used in layers (each rows of Core matrix) of the LDPC matrix. The subscripts in each of the elements in the Core matrix (H) illustrate the layering of the Permuted matrix. For example, a subscript of (x, y) indicate that an ‘xth’ combination of Permuted matrix is used for expansion of that particular element in the Core matrix with a circular shift of ‘y’.
Level-3: In the third level, each of the non-zero elements in the Permuted matrix is expanded by a Base matrix (I). This matrix is a circularly shifted identity matrix of size ‘P’. The number of circular shifts in a Base matrix depends on the elements in the Permuted matrix. This is indicated by the subscript of ‘I’ in the Permuted matrix, as shown in Fig. 3. The size of the Base matrix defines the parallelism factor (P) of the LDPC decoder. That is, the number of check nodes and variable nodes required for parallel processing.
Fig. 3. Simple structure of the proposed 3L-HQC matrix
B. Construction Technique The proposed matrix is constructed using a software
model in the MatLab environment. The technique used for construction of the matrix is illustrated in Fig. 4. All

133 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:29:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the key parameters such as code length, code rate and regularity of the expected LDPC matrix are provided to the software model. The model uses one of the possible combinations of matrix parameters (N, R and P) and the permutation of the random matrices (Rx). The resulting LDPC matrix is verified for girth. Matrices with girth greater than 4 is chosen [15] for further analysis and verification. Other matrices with lower girth are eliminated and the LDPC matrix is re-constructed by varying the permuted matrix structure and circular shift parameters. On obtaining a matrix with girth greater than 4, simulations are carried out to ascertain the BER, frame error rate (FER) and average iteration performance. LDPC matrices with performance close/comparable to that of unstructured matrices is selected and the configuration of the matrix parameters are saved. Matrices with poor performance are rejected and the matrix re-construction procedure is repeated.
Code Length, Code Rate, Regularity
3L-HQC Matrix Structure and
Permutation Matrix

Girth > 4 ?

No

Yes
Performance Simulations: BER, FER and
Average Iterations

matrix [10, 19-21]. However, the proposed matrix is much flexible for constructing LDPC matrices for multiple applications (as shown in Table I) with a marginal loss in the decoding performance.
Table I. Configurations of the proposed matrix for various applications
WiMAX (P=16) WLAN (P=18) DVB-S2 (P=27) CL CR R N CL CR R N CL CR R N 576 1/2 6 1 648 1/2 6 1 16200 1/3 5 20 672 1/2 7 1 1296 1/2 6 2 16200 2/3 5 20 768 1/2 8 1 1944 1/2 6 3 64800 1/2 8 50 864 1/2 9 1 648 2/3 6 1 64800 1/3 8 50 960 1/2 10 1 1296 2/3 6 2 64800 2/3 8 50 1056 1/2 11 1 1944 2/3 6 3 64800 5/6 8 50 1152 1/2 6 2 648 5/6 6 1 - - - 1728 1/2 6 3 1296 5/6 6 2 - - - 2304 1/2 6 4 1944 5/6 6 3 - - - -
Note: CL = Code Length; CR = Code Rate;
D. Visual Analysis The matrices constructed using the proposed
technique is verified for girth. The matrices are also visually analyzed for distribution of non-zero elements. A ½ rate (3, 6) 1296 bit LDPC matrix (for WLAN) constructed using PEG (unstructured random), 2L-HQC and the proposed technique (3L-HQC) is shown in Fig. 5(a), 5(b) and 5(c) respectively.
From Fig. 5(a) it is clear that the PEG based random matrix follows a particular pattern but the position of non-zero elements are not deterministic. However, the QC based matrices in Fig. 5(b) and Fig. 5(c) exhibit a structured pattern.

No

Acceptable

Performance?

Yes

Save Matrix Configuration

Fig. 4. Illustration of the proposed matrix construction technique
C. Standard configurations of the Matrix
The proposed technique can be configured to generate LDPC matrices with different code lengths by varying ‘N’, ‘R’ and ‘P’ parameters. Some of the possible configurations that are suitable for WiMAX [16], WLAN [17] and DVB-S2 [18] application standards are shown in Table I.
Note that a number of decoders have been proposed that uses a flexible multi-rate and multi-length LDPC

(a) PEG based unstructured matrix (b) 2L-HQC structured matrix

134 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:29:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(c) Proposed 3L-HQC structured matrix
Fig. 5. Visual analysis of distribution of non-zero elements in the matrix
The proposed matrix has finer distribution compared to 2L-HQC. This is due to smaller Base matrices in the 3-level hierarchical structure. However, the layered permutation feature of the proposed matrix is not very clearly visible.

Fig. 7. Simulation of FER performance for various matrices

E. Performance Analysis
To analyze the decoding performance of the proposed matrix (3L-HQC), simulations were carried out and compared against 2L-HQC and PEG based matrices. A software simulation model was developed using C programs and executed in the MatLab environment [22]. A ½ rate (3, 6) regular 1296-bit LDPC code (WLAN) using Min-Sum algorithm with 4-bit quantization was used to assess the BER, FER and average iterations for different matrices [23]. For the simulations, the encoded data is assumed to have Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) modulated and passed over an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel [24]. The maximum number of iterations for the algorithm was set to 10.
The BER and FER performance along with the average iterations obtained from simulations are shown in Fig. 6, Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 respectively.

Fig. 8. Simulation of average iterations for various matrices
From Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, it is clear that the proposed matrix outperforms the 2L-HQC by 0.3 dB at a BER of 10-5 and ~0.35 dB at a FER of 10-3 respectively. The PEG based random matrix has a marginal performance gain of less than about 0.1 dB over the proposed matrix at a BER of 10-6 and FER of 10-3 (approx.). However, in the case of average iterations, each of the matrices have difference of approximately 0.25 iterations over 2.25 3.25 dB Eb/No range as shown in Fig. 8. The proposed matrix requires fewer average iterations compared to 2LHQC.

Fig. 6. Simulation of BER performance for various matrices

IV. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a novel technique to construct LDPC matrices with different code lengths suitable for multiple applications. The technique exploits the flexibility of matrix construction inherent in the Hierarchical Quasi-Cyclic (HQC) based approach. It is shown that using multi-level structure along with layered permutation of the matrix leads to increased flexibility in code construction for various application standards. The proposed technique provides better

135 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:29:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

controllability of the parallelism factor and decoding performance levels close to those obtainable from Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) based matrices. These advantages of the proposed matrix have been verified through performance simulations and comparing with various LDPC matrix structures. The throughput of the decoder is scalable by selecting appropriate parallelism factor. Therefore, the proposed technique provides an attractive solution for implementing highly flexible partially-parallel LDPC decoders.
REFERENCES
[1] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes," Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457-458, 13 March 1997.
[2] G.L.L. Nicolas Fau, LDPC (Low Density Parity Check) A Better Coding Scheme for Wireless PHY Layers Design and Reuse Industry Article, 2008.
[3] V.A. Chandrasetty and S.M. Aziz, "FPGA Implementation of High Performance LDPC Decoder Using Modified 2-Bit Min-Sum Algorithm," Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Computer Research and Development, Kuala Lumpur, pp. 881-885, 7-10 May 2010.
[4] M. Karkooti and J.R. Cavallaro, "Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding," Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Technology: Coding and Computing, pp. 579-585, 5-7 April 2004.
[5] E. Liao, Y. Engling, and B. Nikolic, "Low-density paritycheck code constructions for hardware implementation," Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 2573-2577, 20-24 June 2004.
[6] R. Zarubica and S.G. Wilson, "A solution for memory collision in semi-parallel FPGA-based LDPC decoder design," Proceedings of the 41st Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, pp. 982-986, 4-7 November 2007.
[7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M.P.C. Fossorier, "Low density parity check codes: construction based on finite geometries," Proceedings of the IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, San Francisco, CA, pp. 825-829, 27 November-01 December 2000.
[8] Y. Xiao and M.H. Lee, "Construction of good quasicyclic LDPC codes," Proceedings of the Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks, 2006 IET International Conference on, Hangzhou, China, pp. 1-4, 6-9 November 2006.
[9] C. Yi-Hsing and K. Mong-Kai, "A High Throughput HQC LDPC Decoder," Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, New Orleans, LA, pp. 1649-1652, 27-30 May 2007.
[10] N. Bonello, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, "Multilevel Structured Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for AWGN and Rayleigh Channels," Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Communications, Beijing, pp. 485-489, 19-23 May 2008.
[11] H. Xiao-Yu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.M. Arnold, "Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs," Proceedings of the IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, San Antonio, TX, pp. 995-1001, 25-29 November 2001.

[12] X. Hua and A.H. Banihashemi, "Improved progressiveedge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes," IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715-717, December 2004.
[13] X. Zhang and F. Cai, "Partial-parallel decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic non-binary LDPC codes," Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 1506-1509, 14-19 March 2010.
[14] L. Zongwang and B.V.K.V. Kumar, "A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph," Proceedings of the 38th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, pp. 1990-1994, 7-10 November 2004.
[15] W. Xiaofu, Y. Xiaohu, and Z. Chunming, "A necessary and sufficient condition for determining the girth of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 854-857, June 2008.
[16] IEEE Stdandard 802.l6e, "Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems . Amendment 2: Physical and medium access control layers for combined fixed and mobile operation in licensed bands", IEEE, December 2005.
[17] IEEE Std. 802.11n, "Wireless LAN medium access control (MAC) and physicallayer (PHY) specifications: enhancementsfor higher throughput", IEEE, September 2009.
[18] Europian Standard DVB-S2, "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications (DVB-S2)", European Broadcasting Union, August 2009.
[19] L. Yang, M. Shen, H. Liu, and C.-J.R. Shi, "An FPGA implementation of low-density parity-check code decoder with multi-rate capability," Proceedings of the conference on Asia South Pacific design automation, Shanghai, China, pp. 760-763, 18-21 Jan. 2005.
[20] Y. Lei, L. Hui, and C.J.R. Shi, "Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density Parity-check code decoder," IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892-904, April 2006.
[21] F. Charot, C. Wolinski, N. Fau, and F. Hamon, "A New Powerful Scalable Generic Multi-Standard LDPC Decoder Architecture," Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, Palo Alto, CA, pp. 314315, 14-15 April 2008.
[22] V.A. Chandrasetty and S.M. Aziz, "A reduced complexity message passing algorithm with improved performance for LDPC decoding," Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computers and Information Technology, Dhaka, pp. 19-24, 21-23 December 2009.
[23] R. Zarubica, R. Hinton, S.G. Wilson, and E.K. Hall, "Efficient quantization schemes for LDPC decoders," Proceedings of the IEEE Military Communications Conference, San Diego, CA, pp. 1-5, 16-19 November 2008.
[24] J.G. Proakis, Digital communications, 5th ed, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.

136 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:29:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

