Iterative Soft Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes
using Information Correction
Farnaz Shayegh, M. Reza Soleymani
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Concordia University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
AbstractвҖ”A new iterative soft decision decoding method with
very low complexity for Reed-Solomon (RS) codes is proposed.
This method is based on bit level belief propagation (BP)
decoding. In order to make BP decoding effective for RS codes,
we use an extended binary parity check matrix with a lower
density and reduced number of 4-cycles compared to the original
binary parity check matrix of the code. Our proposed method is
based on information correction in BP decoding. It means that
we determine least reliable bits and by changing their channel
information, the convergence of the decoder is improved. Our
method results in considerable performance improvement of RS
codes compared to hard decision decoding. The performance
is also superior or comparable to some popular soft decision
decoding methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
Reed-Solomon (RS) codes are block-based error correct-
ing codes with a wide range of applications in wireless
communications and storage systems. RS codes concatenated
with convolutional codes are the standard channel codes for
satellite transmission and deep-space communications. They
are also outer codes in the third generation (3G) wireless
standard and expected to be used as outer codes in con-
catenated coding schemes for fourth generation of cellular
wireless standard. Guruswami and Vardy [1] have shown that
the maximum likelihood decoding of RS codes is NP-hard.
Based on this fact, many different soft decision decoding
methods have been introduced for RS codes in an effort to
have moderate complexity and a performance close to optimal
ML decoding.
Belief Propagation (BP) iterative decoding was first pro-
posed for decoding low-density parity check (LDPC) codes
[2]. Standard BP iterative decoding is not suitable for high
density parity check codes like RS codes, because for these
codes, there are a large number of short cycles in the factor
graph which cause correlation between the messages and error
propagation. The first successful bit-level iterative decoding
method for RS codes was adaptive parity-check (ADP) algo-
rithm [3]. In ADP, in order to make BP decoding effective
for dense RS parity check matrix, Gaussian Elimination is
performed on the binary parity check matrix before each
iteration such that the variables of lowest reliability connect
into the graph only once. It has been shown that this algorithm
This work has been supported by NSERC CRD grant CRDPJ-340658 as
well as contribution from InterDigital Canada Ltd., PROMPT Quebec and
FQRNT.
has very good performance compared to other soft-decision
decoding algorithms for RS codes. The problem with ADP
algorithm is that the required adaptation of the parity check
matrix at each iteration is very complex.
In this paper, we propose a new bit level iterative soft
decision decoding method for RS codes based on BP decoding
on the fixed binary parity check matrix. In order to make
BP decoding effective for RS codes, we use an extended
binary parity check matrix whose density is lower and has
less number of 4-cycles compared to the original binary parity
check matrix of the code. Even using the extended parity check
matrix, the performance of normal BP decoding is not very
good. In this paper, in order to improve the performance of
normal BP decoding, we use the information correction in
BP decoding. It means that based on the updated reliabilities
at the end of each iteration, we can determine the bits with
lowest reliabilities such that changing their channel informa-
tion improves the convergence of the decoder to a codeword
[4]. In this method, a few steps of information correction
are performed which help improving the performance of the
normal BP decoding. Simulation results demonstrate that the
performance of our method is superior or comparable to KV
method with a very reasonable complexity.
The organization of this paper is as follows. In section II
the system model is introduced. In section III, we first briefly
review the BP decoding. Then we show how to find low
density binary parity check matrix for RS codes. We extend
this matrix with rows and columns to reduce its 4-cycles.
In section IV, using the extended parity check matrix, the
algorithm for soft decision decoding of RS codes based on
BP decoding and information correction is presented. We then
give a geometric interpretation of the proposed algorithm. We
also present a complexity analysis for the proposed algorithm.
Simulation results and discussions are in section V. Conclu-
sions are presented in section VI.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
We use a systematic (рқ‘Ғ, рқҗҫ) RS code. A codeword рқ‘җis:
рқ‘җ= рқ‘Ҹ.рқҗә
(1)
Where рқ‘Ҹis the information sequence and рқҗәis the generator
matrix. The entries of рқ‘Ҹ, рқ‘җand рқҗәare elements from a Galois
Field рқҗәрқҗ№(2рқ‘ҡ) where рқ‘Ғ= 2рқ‘ҡвҲ’1. The parity check matrix
2010 5th International Symposium on Telecommunications (IST'2010)
978-1-4244-8185-9/10/$26.00 В©2010 IEEE
345
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:33:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
of the code can be represented by:
H =
вҺӣ
вҺң
вҺң
вҺқ
1
рқӣј
рқӣј2
...
рқӣј(рқ‘ҒвҲ’1)
1
рқӣј2
рқӣј4
...
рқӣј2(рқ‘ҒвҲ’1)
...
1
рқӣј(рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)
рқӣј2(рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)
...
рқӣј(рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)(рқ‘ҒвҲ’1)
вҺһ
вҺҹ
вҺҹ
вҺ 
(2)
For any codeword рқ‘җof the RS code рқҗ»рқ‘җрқ‘Ү= 0 . Since any
element рқӣҪвҲҲрқҗәрқҗ№(2рқ‘ҡ) has an рқ‘ҡtuple representation, we can
show any codeword of length рқ‘Ғin binary form:
рқ‘җрқ‘Ҹ= (рқ‘җ1,1, рқ‘җ1,2, ..., рқ‘җ1,рқ‘ҡ, рқ‘җ2,1, ..., рқ‘җ2,рқ‘ҡ, ..., рқ‘җрқ‘Ғ,1, ..., рқ‘җрқ‘Ғ,рқ‘ҡ) (3)
We assume BPSK modulation рқ‘Ҙ= вҲ’2рқ‘җрқ‘Ҹ+ 1 over AWGN
wireless channel. So, the received signal is:
рқ‘Ұ= рқ‘Ҙ+ рқ‘ӣ
(4)
Where рқ‘ӣis the AWGN vector with variance рқңҺ2. The reliability
of the received vector can be expressed in terms of the log
likelihood ratios (LLRвҖҷs) that are given by рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ= 2рқ‘Ұ/рқңҺ2.
Here for the decoding, we consider RS codes over an
extension field of рқҗәрқҗ№(2). We denote a primitive polynomial of
рқҗәрқҗ№(2рқ‘ҡ) over рқҗәрқҗ№(2) by рқ‘қ(рқ‘Ҙ) = рқ‘Һ0+рқ‘Һ1рқ‘Ҙ+...+рқ‘Һрқ‘ҡвҲ’1рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҲ’1+
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ. We also suppose that рқӣјis a root of рқ‘қ(рқ‘Ҙ) and therefore a
primitive element in рқҗәрқҗ№(2рқ‘ҡ). For рқ‘қ(рқ‘Ҙ), there is an рқ‘ҡГ— рқ‘ҡ
companion matrix which is given as follows:
cp =
вҺӣ
вҺң
вҺң
вҺқ
0
...
0
рқ‘Һ0
рқ‘Һ1
рқҗјрқ‘ҡвҲ’1
:
рқ‘Һрқ‘ҡвҲ’1
вҺһ
вҺҹ
вҺҹ
вҺ 
(5)
Where рқҗјрқ‘ҡвҲ’1 is an (рқ‘ҡвҲ’1) Г— (рқ‘ҡвҲ’1) identity matrix [5].
A field isomorphism can be defined by the mapping рқӣјрқ‘–вҶ’
рқ‘җрқ‘–
рқ‘қ, рқ‘–= {0, 1, ...}. Based on this mapping, each element of the
parity check matrix of the code is replaced with an рқ‘ҡГ— рқ‘ҡ
binary matrix resulting a binary parity check matrix рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹof size
(рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡГ—рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡ. Such a mapping results in рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹрқ‘җрқ‘Ү
рқ‘Ҹ= 0. This
equation specifies the set of linear constraints satisfied by the
codeword bits. Every linear code can also be represented by a
bipartite graph where the set of variable nodes represents the
codeword bits and the set of check nodes represents the set of
parity-check constraints satisfied by the codeword bits. There
is also a set of edges that connect every check node with all
the variables nodes involved in its check equation.
III. ITERATIVE DECODING OF RS CODES USING BELIEF
PROPAGATION
A. Standard Belief Propagation decoding of RS Codes
In the bipartite graph of the binary image of an (рқ‘Ғ, рқҗҫ)
RS code, there are (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқ‘ҳ)рқ‘ҡcheck nodes and рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡvariable
nodes. We define рқ‘Ғрқ‘җрқ‘–as the set of variable nodes participating
in check equation рқ‘–and рқ‘Ғрқ‘Јрқ‘—as the set of check nodes that
variable node рқ‘—is involved with. The log-likelihood ratio
(LLR) of the jth variable node given the information about
all parity check nodes except node рқ‘–is shown by рқ‘„рқ‘–,рқ‘—and
the LLR that check node рқ‘–is satisfied when variable node
рқ‘—is fixed to 0 and 1 respectively is shown by рқ‘…рқ‘–,рқ‘—. Given
the vector рқңҢрқ‘–рқ‘ӣof initial LLRвҖҷs, the BP algorithm outputs the
extrinsic LLRвҖҷs рқңҢрқ‘Ҙusing the following algorithm [6]:
For all (рқ‘–, рқ‘—) such that рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹ(рқ‘–, рқ‘—) = 1 :
1- Initialization: рқ‘„рқ‘–,рқ‘—= рқңҢрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘—
Do
2- Horizontal step (check nodes updates):
рқ‘…рқ‘–,рқ‘—= 2рқ‘Ўрқ‘Һрқ‘ӣв„ҺвҲ’1(О рқ‘ҳвҲҲрқ‘Ғрқ‘җрқ‘–вҲ–рқ‘—рқ‘Ўрқ‘Һрқ‘ӣв„Һ(рқ‘„рқ‘–,рқ‘ҳ/2))
3- Vertical step (variable nodes updates):
рқ‘„рқ‘–,рқ‘—= рқңҢрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘—+ вҲ‘
рқ‘ҳвҲҲрқ‘Ғрқ‘Јрқ‘—вҲ–рқ‘–рқ‘…рқ‘ҳ,рқ‘—
While stopping criterion is not met.
4- рқңҢрқ‘Ҙ
рқ‘—= вҲ‘
рқ‘ҳвҲҲрқ‘Ғрқ‘Јрқ‘—рқ‘…рқ‘ҳ,рқ‘—
The stopping criterion could be when all the checks are
satisfied or when we reach the maximum number of iterations.
Standard BP iterative decoding is not suitable for high density
parity check codes like RS codes, because for these codes,
the large number of short cycles in the factor graph will
cause correlation between the messages and consequently error
propagation.
B. Low Density Parity Check Matrix for RS Codes
The total number of short cycles in the factor graph of
RS codes increases exponentially with the parity check matrix
density. The density of the binary image of the parity check
matrix given in equation (2) is around 50% for different RS
codes which leads to a large number of short cycles. So, one
step is to find a low density binary parity check mtrix for an
(рқ‘Ғ, рқҗҫ) RS code which is equivalent to finding the (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ
codewords of low hamming weight that span the binary image
of the dual code of the RS code which is also an RS code.
We may construct these low weight codewords by considering
the subcodes of the binary image of the dual code consisting
of codewords that are nonzero only on a subset of the рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡ
coordinate positions [7]. In order to construct these subcodes,
for a given parameter рқ‘ < рқ‘ҡ, we define a support set рқ‘…:
рқ‘…= {рқ‘–1, рқ‘–2, ..., рқ‘–рқ‘ } вҠӮ{1, 2, ..., рқ‘ҡ}
(6)
We look for any codeword рқ‘Ҹof the dual code which is zero
outsize the defined support set рқ‘…:
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘–,рқ‘—= 0, (рқ‘–, рқ‘—) вҲҲ{1, 2, ..., рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡ} Г— ВҜрқ‘…
(7)
Where ВҜрқ‘…= {1, 2, ..., рқ‘ҡ} вҲ–рқ‘…. Codewords satisfying the above
constrains (if they exist) may be obtained from the appropriate
linear combinations of the rows of рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹ[7]. We will repeat this
procedure for different support sets and among the codewords
that we obtain, we choose the ones with lowest weight that
span the binary image of the dual code [7].
If the low weight codewords donвҖҷt span the binary image of
the dual code, we arrange the rows of the systematic рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹin an
increasing order of their hamming weight. We start from the
first row and select the ones that help to complete the span of
the dual code. The density of the new parity check matrix for
different RS codes is around 30% which leads to less short
cycles compared to the original рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹ.
346
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:33:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
C. Extended Parity Check Matrix for RS Codes
In order to reduce the number of 4-cycles in the factor
graph of the RS code, we can extend the low density parity
check matrix by rows and columns [7]. At first, we select the
two rows (checks) with maximum variable nodes in common
denoted by row рқ‘–and row рқ‘—. We form a new row with ones
in variable overlap positions of the two checks. In order for
this new row to be a check equation, we have to add a new
variable (column) with single one at the new row and zero
elsewhere to the parity matrix to ensure even parity of the
new check. We add this new check to row рқ‘–and row рқ‘—and
replace them with the results [7]. By doing so, all the 4-cycles
among variables associated with row рқ‘–, row рқ‘—and this new row
will be eliminated.
Then we select next two checks with maximum variable
overlap and repeat the previous procedure to add a new row
and a new column. After completing this process, the extended
parity check matrix will have рқ‘ҹрқ‘’= (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ+(рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ/2
rows and рқ‘ӣрқ‘’= рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡ+ (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ/2 columns. The density
of the new extended parity check matrix is around 15% for
different RS codes which means considerably less short cycles.
Since we never actually transmit these new variables, during
the decoding, we consider them as erasures (zero LLRs).
In [8], we have investigated the performance of BP decoding
of RS codes over binary erasure channel (BEC) with erasure
probability equal to рқң–. The performance of BP decoding of a
specific code depends largely on the parity check matrix that
is used for decoding. We have considered three different parity
check matrices: 1- the original binary parity check matrix
with density around 50%, 2- low density parity check matrix
with density around 30%, 3- extended parity check matrix
with density around 15%. The performence of BP decoding
using the extended parity check matrix was much better than
the others. Therefore, in the next section that we propose a
new method for iterative decoding of RS codes, we use the
extended binary parity check matrix for BP decoding.
IV. PROPOSED ITERATIVE DECODING OF RS CODES
Using the extended parity check matrix discussed previ-
ously, we can perform decoding of RS codes using normal BP
iterations. However, the performance will be far away from the
performance of the ML decoder because there are still large
number of cycles in the factor graph of the code. Therefore, In
this section we present a method to improve the performance
of normal BP decoding.
A. Iterative Decoding of RS Codes Based on Information
Correction
The new method is based on information correction in the
BP decoding algorithm [4]. In this method, first normal BP
decoding is performed for рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙiterations. During these
iterations, the average decoded LLRs are recorded:
рқңҢрқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ
рқ‘ рқ‘ўрқ‘ҡ
(рқ‘җрқ‘—) =
1
рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ
рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ
вҲ‘
рқ‘–=1
рқңҢрқ‘–(рқ‘җрқ‘—)
рқ‘—= 1, ..., рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡ+ (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ
2
(8)
where рқңҢрқ‘–(рқ‘җрқ‘—) is the reliability of the рқ‘—рқ‘Ўв„Һbit after рқ‘–iterations.
If a codeword is reached during these iterations, we terminate
the algorithm. However, if decoding was not successful at
the end of рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙiterations, рқҗјрқҗ¶рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙsteps of information
correction are performed:
Step 1) Based on the average LLRs, we select the least
reliable bit:
рқ‘җрқ‘қ= рқ‘Һрқ‘ҹрқ‘”рқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘җрқ‘—


рқңҢрқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ
рқ‘ рқ‘ўрқ‘ҡ
(рқ‘җрқ‘—)


 .
(9)
Changing the channel information of the selected bit very
likely improves the convergence of the decoder to a codeword.
Therefore, we perform two tests by setting рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘қ) = Вұрқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘“
and for each case we continue BP iterations with the new
channel reliabilities for additional рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘Һрқ‘‘рқ‘‘iterations. During
these iterations, we also record the average LLRs:
рқңҢрқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘Һрқ‘‘рқ‘‘
рқ‘ рқ‘ўрқ‘ҡ
(рқ‘җрқ‘—) =
1
рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘Һрқ‘‘рқ‘‘
рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ+рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘Һрқ‘‘рқ‘‘
вҲ‘
рқ‘–=рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ+1
рқңҢрқ‘–(рқ‘җрқ‘—)
рқ‘—= 1, ..., рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡ+ (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ
2
.
(10)
At the end of each test, we select one least reliable bit based
on the average LLRs. We assume these bits are at positions
в„Һand рқ‘ҳfor the case рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘қ) = +рқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘“and рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘қ) = вҲ’рқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘“
respectively.
Step 2) At the second step, we perform four tests by
setting рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘қ) = +рқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘“, рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җв„Һ) = Вұрқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘“and рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘қ) =
вҲ’рқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘“, рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘ҳ) = Вұрқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘“. For each of the new channel reliabili-
ties, we continue BP iterations from рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙfor additional
рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘Һрқ‘‘рқ‘‘iterations and record the average LLRs based on
equation (10). Finally, four least reliable bits are selected for
each case.
In general, step рқ‘—of the algorithm for 2 < рқ‘—вүӨрқҗјрқҗ¶рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙwill
be as follow:
Step рқ‘—) For each of 2рқ‘—вҲ’1 bits selected at step рқ‘—вҲ’1, two
tests are performed. For each of 2рқ‘—tests, BP iterations are
continued with the new channel reliabilities for additional
рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘Һрқ‘‘рқ‘‘iterations and 2рқ‘—bits are selected.
If a valid codeword is reached at any step, the decoding is
terminated. Here, at the end of each BP iteration, we perform
BM decoding using the updated reliabilities. However, if the
BM decoding is successful, we do not stop the algorithm
just save that codeword. In the end, we choose one of the
saved codewords with minimum Euclidean distance from the
received vector as the decoding response.
Using this strategy we can enforce the correct values on the
selected bits and eliminate pseudo-codewords. Therefore, the
chance of BP iterations to converge to a codeword is improved
347
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:33:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
significantly. It should be noted that by increasing the signal
to noise ratio, the information correction technique is more
effective, because at higher рқҗёрқ‘Ҹ/рқ‘Ғ0, there are less bit errors
at the channel output.
As we mentioned before, there are considerable short cycles
even in the factor graph of the extended parity check matrix.
Therefore, there will be correlation between the messages and
the values of high reliable bits may be affected significantly
by the values of low reliable bits. To avoid this, we can select
the highest reliable bits using a threshold value рқңҸ:
рқҗ¶в„Һ=
{
рқ‘җрқ‘—,


рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘—)


 > рқңҸ
}
.
(11)
We then fix the values of these selected bits using hard decision
and do not update them during the BP iterations:
рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘—) = рқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘”рқ‘ӣ(рқңҢрқ‘җв„Һ(рқ‘җрқ‘—)) Г— рқ‘–рқ‘ӣрқ‘“,
вҲҖрқ‘җрқ‘—вҲҲрқҗ¶в„Һ.
(12)
If the threshold is selected appropriately, the selected bits will
have correct channel information with high probability. This
way, high reliable correct bits are safe and their values are not
affected in any ways.
In the proposed algorithm we use both BP decoding and
hard decision BM decoding. At the end of each BP iteration,
the hard decision version of updated reliabilities is used
as the input to the BM decoding algorithm. Even in the
situations that BM algorithm can recover a codeword, we do
not stop the algorithm just save that codeword. In the end,
if the BP decoding was not successful, we choose one of
the saved codewords with minimum Euclidean distance from
the received vector as the response of the proposed iterative
decoding method. Therefore, the block error rate of the method
can be written as:
рқ‘ғрқҗө= рқ‘ғрқҗөвҲ’рқҗөрқ‘ҖГ— рқ‘ғрқҗөвҲ’рқҗөрқ‘ғ
(13)
where рқ‘ғрқҗөвҲ’рқҗөрқ‘Җis the block error rate of BM decoding method
and рқ‘ғрқҗөвҲ’рқҗөрқ‘ғis the block error rate of BP decoding with
information correction.
In order to reduce the number of required BP iterations
before finding the response of the algorithm, we define a
radius рқ‘ҹ=
вҲҡ
рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡрқңҺ2. Each time there is a decoding success
at the output of BM algorithm, we check the distance of that
codeword from the received vector рқ‘‘= вҲҘЛң
рқ‘Ҙрқҗөрқ‘ҖвҲ’рқ‘ҰвҲҘwhere
Лң
рқ‘Ҙрқҗөрқ‘Җ= вҲ’2 Лң
рқ‘җрқҗөрқ‘Җ+ 1. If рқ‘‘<= рқ‘ҹ, we terminate the algorithm.
We refer to this process as extra stopping criterion (рқ‘‘вүӨрқ‘ҹ). Of
course by doing so, the performance of our proposed algorithm
will be slightly worse than before. So, we have a trade-off
between the performance and the complexity.
B. Analysis of Information Correction: Geometric Interpreta-
tion of the Proposed Algorithm
The belief propagation based algorithms were shown to be
special cases of the gradient descent algorithm [9]. We define
the potential function рқҗҪas [3]:
рқҗҪ(рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹ, рқ‘Ү) = вҲ’
рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ҳ
вҲ‘
рқ‘—=1
рқӣҫрқ‘—= вҲ’
рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ҳ
вҲ‘
рқ‘—=1
рқ‘ӣ
вҲҸ
рқ‘қ=1,рқҗ»рқ‘—рқ‘қ=1
рқ‘Үрқ‘қ
(14)
where рқҗҪis a function of both the parity check matrix рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹand
the received soft information T:
рқ‘Ү= [рқ‘Ү1, рқ‘Ү2, ..., рқ‘Үрқ‘ӣ] = [рқ‘Ј(рқңҢ(рқ‘җ1)), ..., рқ‘Ј(рқңҢ(рқ‘җрқ‘ӣ))]
(15)
Here, the operator рқ‘Ј: [вҲ’вҲһ, вҲһ] вҶ’[вҲ’1, 1] is a mapping from
the LLR domain to tanh domain:
рқ‘Ј(рқңҢ) = рқ‘Ўрқ‘Һрқ‘ӣв„Һ(рқңҢ
2) = 1 + рқ‘’рқңҢ/2
1 вҲ’рқ‘’рқңҢ/2
(16)
When all the checks are satisfied, we have reached a valid
codeword and the potential function рқҗҪis minimized. In this
case, вҲЈрқ‘Үрқ‘—вҲЈ= 1 for рқ‘—= 1, ..., рқ‘ӣand рқҗҪрқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ= вҲ’(рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ҳ). In
the case of RS codes, even using the extended parity check
matrix, the density is still high and applying the iterative
decoding might lead to some local minimum points called
pseudo-equilibrium points. These point are not corresponded
to valid codewords and the iterative algorithm gets stuck at
them. Actually, there are a few unreliable bits which do not
let рқҗҪto be minimum.
Because рқҗҪis a function of both рқҗ»рқ‘Ҹand T (bit reliabilities),
changing reliabilities using information correction results in
different potential functions рқҗҪ. The proposed algorithm uses
this fact and when a pseudo-equilibrium point is reached,
we change the bit reliabilities using information correction
steps, such that it allows the update to proceed rather than
getting stuck at the pseudo-equilibrium point. In Figure 1,
we have shown the potential function рқҗҪfor three steps of
information correction while decoding RS(31,25) with BPSK
modulation over the AWGN channel with
рқҗёрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘Ғ0 = 4 dB. As it
can be seen in this figure, during initial iterations and also
the first step of information correction, BP decoding gets
stuck in a pseudo-equilibrium point and can not converge
to a codeword. However, in the second step of information
correction, BP decoding converges to the correct codeword.
Here, for RS(31,25), the extended parity check matrix is an
рқ‘ҹрқ‘’Г— рқ‘ӣрқ‘’matrix with рқ‘ҹрқ‘’= (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘қ+ (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘қ/2 and
therefore рқҗҪрқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ= вҲ’рқ‘ҹрқ‘’= вҲ’45 that has been reached during
the second step of information correction.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
вҲ’50
вҲ’45
вҲ’40
вҲ’35
вҲ’30
вҲ’25
вҲ’20
вҲ’15
вҲ’10
вҲ’5
0
5
10
Number of iterations
Potential function (J)
Initial iterations
Step 3
Step 2
Step 1
Fig. 1.
Potential function versus the number of iterations for three steps of
information correction of method B while decoding RS(31,25) with BPSK
modulation over the AWGN channel with рқҗёрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘Ғ0 = 4 dB.
348
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:33:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
C. Complexity Analysis of the Proposed Algorithm
The complexity of belief propagation in each iteration is
proportional to the number of nonzero elements in the parity
check matrix of the code. Because the density of the extended
binary parity check matrix is around 15%, the time complexity
of each BP iteration is:
рқ‘Ӯ(0.15 Г— рқ‘ҹрқ‘’Г— рқ‘ӣрқ‘’)
(17)
where рқ‘ҹрқ‘’= (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ+ (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ/2 and рқ‘ӣрқ‘’= рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡ+
(рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)рқ‘ҡ/2.
In the ADP method, each iteration involves рқ‘Ӯ(рқ‘Ғ2рқ‘ҡ2)
floating point operations for sorting and BP, and рқ‘Ӯ(рқ‘Ғрқ‘ҡГ—
рқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ(рқҗҫ2рқ‘ҡ2, (рқ‘ҒвҲ’рқҗҫ)2рқ‘ҡ2)) binary operations for Gaussian
Elimination. So, the complexity of each iteration of our
method is less than ADP method.
The maximum number of BP iterations in our method based
on information correction is
рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ+ рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘Һрқ‘‘рқ‘‘Г—
вҺӣ
вҺқ
рқҗјрқҗ¶рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ
вҲ‘
рқ‘—=1
2рқ‘—
вҺһ
вҺ .
(18)
However, most of the times, we find the response very soon
and the actual complexity is much less than the maximum
complexity.
In the next section that we present simulation results for
different RS codes, we provide tables of the average number
of required BP iterations for different signal to noise ratios.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, simulation results for decoding of RS codes
based on the proposed algorithm are presented. For all the
simulations, we suppose BPSK transmission over wireless
AWGN channel. The maximum number of initial BP iterations
is set to рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ЎвҲ’рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ= 60. We will have 4 steps of information
correction and рқҗөрқ‘ғрқ‘Һрқ‘‘рқ‘‘= 10. So, the maximum number of
iterations using Equation (18) will be 360.
We compare our algorithm with Berlekamp-Massey (BM)
hard decision decoding method [10] and also the algebraic soft
decision decoding proposed by Koetter and Vardy [11] [6] that
will be mentioned by KV algorithm. We will also compare our
results with ADP method [3]. It is also important to compare
our algorithms with the best performance possible, which is
that of the ML decoder. The weight enumerator of an RS code
under a specific binary image expansion is not known. The
averaged ensemble of an RS code can be found by averaging
over all possible binary expansions [12]. The averaged binary
weight enumerator can then be used by Divsalar simple bound
[13] to bound the ML error probability [3].
A. RS(15,11) code
In Figure 2, we have shown the performances of our
proposed method. From this figure, at codeword error rate of
10вҲ’3, decoding using our method provides a coding gain of
2.5 dB compared to the BM method, about 1.5 dB compared to
the KV method and 0.25 dB compared to the ADP-BM (5,1).
The performance of our method is only 0.25 dB away from
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
10
вҲ’6
10
вҲ’5
10
вҲ’4
10
вҲ’3
10
вҲ’2
10
вҲ’1
10
0
Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)
Codeword Error Rate
RS (15,11,5), BPSK Modulation, AWGN Channel
 
 
Hard DecisionвҲ’BM Algorithm
KV Algorithm, cost=1000
KV Algorithm, cost=inf
ADPвҲ’BM (5,1)
Proposed Method with extra
stopping criterion
ML simulation
Fig. 2.
Performance of the proposed algorithm for RS(15,11)
TABLE I
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(15,11)
Eb/N0 (dB)
2
3
4
5
Proposed method
99
47
13
2
with extra stopping criterion (рқ‘‘вүӨрқ‘ҹ)
the performance of the ML simulation. In order to consider
the complexity, Table I shows the average number of required
BP iterations for our method. From this Table, we can also
see that the proposed method requires very small number of
BP iterations.
B. RS(31,25) code
From Figure 3, at codeword error rate of 10вҲ’4, decoding
using our algorithm with the extra stopping criterion (рқ‘‘вүӨрқ‘ҹ)
provides a coding gain of more than 1 dB compared to the
asymptotic performance of the KV algorithm and about 2 dB
compared to the BM algorithm. The perfomance of our method
is very close to the performance of ADP-BM (5,1). However,
as we can see in Table II, the complexity of our method is
very low especially at high signal to noise ratios.
TABLE II
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(31,25)
Eb/N0 (dB)
3
4
5
5.5
Proposed method
164
102
22
7
with extra stopping criterion (рқ‘‘вүӨрқ‘ҹ)
C. RS(255,239) code
From Figure 4, at codeword error rate of 10вҲ’4, our method
has about 0.65 dB coding gain over BM algorithm and its
performance is very close to the performance of KV algorithm.
The performance of our method is about 0.25 dB away from
the performance of ADP-BM (5,1) at codeword error rate of
10вҲ’4. However, as discussed before, the complexity of our
methods is much less than the ADP method mainly because
we do not perform Gaussian eliminations at every iteration.
349
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:33:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
вҲ’6
10
вҲ’5
10
вҲ’4
10
вҲ’3
10
вҲ’2
10
вҲ’1
10
0
Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)
Codeword Error Rate
RS (31,25,7), BPSK Modulation, AWGN Channel
 
 
HardвҲ’DecisionвҲ’BM Algorithm
KV Algorithm, cost=inf
Proposed Method with
Extra Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
ADPвҲ’BM (5,1)
ADPвҲ’BM (20,1)
ML lower Bound
Fig. 3.
Performance of the proposed algorithm for RS(31,25)
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
10
вҲ’6
10
вҲ’5
10
вҲ’4
10
вҲ’3
10
вҲ’2
10
вҲ’1
10
0
Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)
Codeword Error Rate
RS(255,239), BPSK Modulation, AWGN Channel
 
 
Hard DecisionвҲ’BM Algorithm
KV Algorithm, cost=inf
Proposed Method with Extra
Stopping Criterion (d<=r)
ADPвҲ’BM (5,1)
ML Lower Bound
Fig. 4.
Performance of the proposed algorithm for RS(255,239)
From Tables I, II and III, we can see that by increasing the
signal to noise ratio, the number of required BP iterations and
therefore the complexity of the iterative algorithm are reduced.
Also, the average number of required BP iterations is much
less than the maximum number of BP iterations.
VI. CONCLUSION
We proposed a soft decision decoding algorithm based
on bit level belief propagation decoding for RS codes. The
advantage of our method over ADP method [3] is that it works
with the fixed parity check matrix. We used an extended binary
parity check matrix with lower density and reduced number of
4-cycles compared to the original binary parity check matrix
of the code. Using the extended parity check matrix, the
algorithm for soft decision decoding of RS codes based on BP
decoding and information correction was presented. We also
presented geometric interpretation and complexity analysis
of the proposed algorithm. Simulation results showed that
our method has significant gain over hard decision decoding.
TABLE III
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(255,239)
Eb/N0 (dB)
5
5.5
6
6.5
Proposed method
264
158
17
2
with extra stopping criterion (рқ‘‘вүӨрқ‘ҹ)
The performance is also superior to the KV method and
comparable to the ADP method.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Guruswami and A. Vardy, вҖңMaximum-likelihood decoding of Reed-
Solomon codes is NP-hard,вҖқ in Proceedings of the sixteenth annual
ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, Vancouver, Canada,
January 2005, pp. 470вҖ“478.
[2] R. Gallager, вҖңLow-density parity-check codes,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21вҖ“28, 1962.
[3] J. Jiang and K. Narayanan, вҖңIterative soft input soft output decoding of
Reed-Solomon codes by adapting the parity check matrix,вҖқ IEEE Trans.
Inform. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746вҖ“3756, 2006.
[4] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, вҖңBelief-propagation with information
correction: improved near maximum-likelihood decoding of low-density
parity-check codes,вҖқ in Proceedings. International Symposium on Infor-
mation Theory (ISIT), Chicago, USA, 2004, pp. 343вҖ“343.
[5] R. Horn and C. Johnson, Matrix Analysis.
New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1985.
[6] M. El-Khamy and R. McEliece, вҖңIterative algebraic soft-decision list
decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,вҖқ IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 481вҖ“490, March 2006.
[7] J. Bellorado, Low-complexity soft decoding algorithms for Reed-
Solomon codes.
Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering,
Harvard University, USA, 2006.
[8] F. Shayegh and M. Soleymani, вҖңA low complexity iterative technique for
soft decision decoding of reed-solomon codes,вҖқ in IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), Dresden, Germany, 2009, pp.
1вҖ“6.
[9] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, вҖңOn iterative soft-decision
decoding of linear binary block codes and product codes,вҖқ IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 276вҖ“296, 1998.
[10] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and
Applications.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1983.
[11] R. Koetter and A. Vardy, вҖңAlgebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-
Solomon codes,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 49,
no. 11, pp. 2809вҖ“2825, 2003.
[12] C. Retter, вҖңAn average weight-distance enumerator for binary expansions
of Reed-Solomon codes,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 1195вҖ“1200, 2002.
[13] D. Divsalar, вҖңA simple tight bound on error probability of block codes
with application to turbo codes,вҖқ TMO Progress Report, vol. 19, pp.
42вҖ“139, 1999.
350
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:33:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
