6294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

Norm-Product Belief Propagation: Primal-Dual Message-Passing for Approximate Inference
Tamir Hazan and Amnon Shashua

Abstract—Inference problems in graphical models can be rep-

resented as a constrained optimization of a free-energy function.

In this paper, we treat both forms of probabilistic inference, esti-

mating marginal probabilities of the joint distribution and finding

the most probable assignment, through a unified message-passing

algorithm architecture. In particular we generalize the belief

propagation (BP) algorithms of sum-product and max-product

and tree-reweighted (TRW) sum and max product algorithms

(TRBP) and introduce a new set of convergent algorithms based

on “convex-free-energy” and linear-programming (LP) relaxation

as a zero-temperature of a convex-free-energy. The main idea

of this work arises from taking a general perspective on the

+ existing BP and TRBP algorithms while observing that they all

are reductions from the basic optimization formula of f

i hi

where the function f is an extended-valued, strictly convex but

nonsmooth and the functions hi are extended-valued functions

(not necessarily convex). We use tools from convex duality to

present the “primal-dual ascent” algorithm which is an extension

+ of the Bregman successive projection scheme and is designed to

handle optimization of the general type f

i hi. We then map

the fractional-free-energy variational principle for approximate

inference onto the optimization formula above and introduce

the “norm-product” message-passing algorithm. Special cases

of the norm-product include sum-product and max-product

(BP algorithms), TRBP and NMPLP algorithms. When the

fractional-free-energy is set to be convex (convex-free-energy) the

norm-product is globally convergent for the estimation of marginal

probabilities and for approximating the LP-relaxation. We also

introduce another branch of the norm-product which arises as the

“zero-temperature” of the convex-free-energy which we refer to

as the “convex-max-product”. The convex-max-product is conver-

gent (unlike max-product) and aims at solving the LP-relaxation.

Index Terms—Approximate inference, Bethe free energy, Bregman projection, convex free energy, dual block ascent, Fenchel duality, graphical models, linear programming (LP) relaxation, Markov random fields (MRF), max-product algorithm, maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) estimation, sum-product algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION
P ROBABILISTIC graphical models present a convenient and popular tool for reasoning about complex distributions. The graphical model reflects the way the complex dis-
Manuscript received March 16, 2009; revised June 20, 2010. Date of current version November 19, 2010. This work was supported by the Israeli Science Foundation (ISF) under Grant 519/09.
T. Hazan is with Toyota Institute of Technology at Chicago (TTIC), Chicago, IL 60637 USA (e-mail: tamir@ttic.edu).
A. Shashua is with the School of Engineering and Computer Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel (e-mail: shashua@cs. huji.ac.il).
Communicated by H.-A. Loeliger, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2010.2079014

tribution

factors into a product of potential func-

tions, each defined over a small number of variables, and re-

ferred to as factors. A graphical model, which defined in terms

of factor graphs, represents the incidence between factors and

the variables by a bipartite graph with one set of nodes corre-

sponding to the variables of the joint distribution and another

set of nodes standing for the factors. An edge exists between a

variable node and a factor node if the variable is contained in

the set of variables represented by the factor. In many applica-

tions of interest the factor graph is sparse. In other words, in the

modeling of the joint behavior of a set of interacting variables

it is often the case that only a small subset of variables interact

directly. For example, in the domain of image processing, if we

think of each pixel as a variable in a joint distribution over all

image pixels then, typically the intensity value of a single pixel

will depend most strongly on neighboring pixels in the image,

rather than on those at a distant location. Without the local inter-

action assumption, i.e., if each variable interacts directly with all

other variables, then the inference of the joint behavior would

be a hopeless task.

Problems involving inference using graphical models comes

up in a wide range of applications covering a variety of disci-

plines. Those include digital communications (error correcting

codes [13]), computer vision [55], medical diagnosis [25], pro-

tein folding [69], computer graphics [14], [9], clustering [49], as

well as other broad disciplines which include signal processing,

artificial intelligence and statistical physics [15], [27].

Probabilistic inference comes in two distinct forms and

typically involve two slightly different algorithmic thrusts.

One form of inference task is to obtain one global state of the

joint distribution that is most probable, i.e., find the values

of

which maximizes

. This form of

inference is typically referred to as the maximal a-posteriori as-

signment, or in its abbreviated form, the MAP assignment. The

second type of inference has the objective of obtaining marginal

probabilities for some subset of variables given evidence (value

of) about other variables. For example, if

then

comes out of summing exponentially many elements

resulting in the likelihood of

to obtain each of its possible values. In this paper, we

will focus on both inference problems with the objective of

introducing a unifying algorithmic thrust.

Exact inference is NP-hard [50], thus introducing the need to

derive algorithms for approximate inference. One of the most

popular class of methods for inference over (factor) graphs

are message-passing algorithms which pass messages along

the edges of the factor graph until convergence is reached.

The belief-propagation (BP) algorithms [44] come in two

variations: the sum-product algorithm for computing marginal

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6295

probabilities and the max-product algorithm for computing the MAP assignment. Citing [70], the centrality of inference using graphical models and the utility of the BP algorithms for solving them is reflected in the fact that equivalent or very similar message-passing algorithms have been independently derived under different disciplines. Those include the Viterbi algorithm [60], Gallager’s sum-product algorithm for decoding low-density parity check codes [16], the turbo-decoding algorithm [3], the Kalman filter for signal processing [28], and the transfer-matrix approach in statistical mechanics [1].
The BP algorithms are exact, i.e., the resulting marginal probabilities and the MAP assignments are the correct ones, when the factor graph is free of cycles—a state of affairs that considerably limits the application of those algorithms to solve real world problems. Nevertheless, an intriguing feature of BP, which most likely is the source for its great popularity, is that it is well-defined and often gives surprisingly good approximate results for graphical models with cycles. However, in this context there are no convergence guarantees (except under some special cases [56], [41]) and the algorithms fail to converge in many cases of interest.
During the past decade there has been much progress in putting forward a framework for approximate inference using variational principles. It has been shown that the fixed-points of the sum-product algorithm (for estimating marginal probabilities) correspond to the fixed-points of a constrained energy function called the Bethe free energy [70]. The free energy arises from the expansion of the KL-divergence between the input distribution and its product form. The Bethe approximation replaces the entropy term in the free energy by the Bethe entropy. The investigation of the stationary points of the Bethe free energy yields conditions for convergence of BP [20], and lower bounds for the free energy in some special cases [54]. These lower bounds are based on the loop calculus framework which considers the Bethe free energy as a first-order approximation for the free energy [8]. The Bethe free energy is exact for factor graphs without cycles, as well as convex over the set of constraints (representing validity of marginals). When the factor graph has cycles the Bethe energy is nonconvex and the BP algorithms may fail to converge. Although it is possible to derive convergent algorithms to a local minima of the Bethe function [71], [22] the computational cost is large and thus has not gained popularity.
To overcome the difficulty with the nonconvexity of the Bethe approximation, several authors have introduced a class of approximations known as convex free energies which are convex over the set of constraints for any factor graph. An important member of this class is the tree-reweighted (TRW) free energy which consists of a linear combination of free energies defined on spanning trees of the factor graph [62]. It is notable that for this specific member of convex free energies a convergent message-passing algorithm, applicable to pairwise factors only, has been recently introduced [17]. However, a convergent message passing algorithm for the general class of convex free energies is still lacking. The existing algorithms either employ damping heuristics to ensure convergence in practice [63] or focus on a subclass of free energies where the entropy term is a positive combination of joint entropies [22].

The MAP assignment problem has been shown to be approximated by a Linear-Programming (LP) relaxation scheme [64] with message-passing algorithmic attempts as a solution [31], [66], [18], [67], [37]. Some of these attempts guarantee convergence only under special cases (such as binary variables), [31], [66]. Others, such as [18], arises as a special case of our algorithm. We refer to [37] for detailed account on the connections between these message-passing algorithms. A double-loop of message passing using a proximal minimization technique proposed recently by [45] is convergent but at a considerable computational expense. Dual decomposition techniques were recently proposed [30], [33], which are related to dual subgradient methods for the LP relaxation.
In this paper, we derive a class of approximate inference message-passing algorithms, which we call norm-product algorithms, using the notion of free-energy approximation. The norm-product is an inference engine covering both the estimation of marginal probabilities and the MAP assignment. When the Bethe free energy is used as a substitution for the free-energy, the norm-product reduces to the sum-product and max-product algorithms where the latter emerges as a “zero temperature” version of the former. When a convex-free-energy is used the norm-product becomes a convergent family of algorithms along three strains: (i) a globally convergent algorithm, which we call convex-sum-product, for estimating marginal probabilities, (ii) a locally convergent algorithm emerging as a zero-temperature version of the former strain, we call convex-max-product, for estimating the MAP assignment, and (iii) a globally convergent algorithm for the LP-relaxation problem.
The convex-sum-product algorithm was published in [19] with only a brief sketch of the detailed derivation. In this paper we have chosen to put a large amount of material in appendices. Due to the complexity of the presented material and the extensive use of modern optimization infrastructure, the body of the paper contains the main “storyline”, statements and algorithms whereas the detailed proofs and the required mathematical infrastructure are contained in appendices.

II. NOTATIONS, PROBLEM SETUPAND BACKGROUND

Let

be the realizations of discrete random

variables where the range of the

random variable is

, i.e.,

. We consider a joint distri-

bution

and assume that it factors into a product

of nonnegative functions (potentials)

(1)

where the functions

represent “local evidence” or prior

data on the states of , and the functions

have argu-

ments that are some subset of

and is a nor-

malization constant, typically referred as the partition function.

For example

has

two factors with indices

and

,

, and uniform local evidence

for every

and every .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

The factorization structure above defines a hypergraph whose When the factor graph has no cycles the messages converge and

nodes represent the random variables and the subsets of vari- the beliefs correspond to the marginal probabilities. When the

ables correspond to its hyperedges. For example, if all factor factor graph has cycles there is no convergence guarantee and,

functions are defined on pairs of random variables then the fac- regardless of convergence, the recovered beliefs provide only an

torization is represented by a graph. A convenient way to rep- approximation to the marginal probabilities.

resent hypergraphs is by a bipartite graph with one set of nodes In the max-product algorithm the messages

are

corresponding to the original nodes of the hypergraph and the slightly altered

other set corresponds to its hyperedges. In the context of graph-

ical models, such a bipartite graph representation is referred to

as a factor graph [35] with variable nodes representing

and a factor node for each function

. An edge connects

a variable node with factor node if and only if

, i.e., while

remain as in the sum-product algorithm. The

is an argument of . We adopt the terminology where

MAP assignment can be recovered from the beliefs

when

stands for all factor nodes that are neighbors of variable node , the factor graph is a tree. In such a case, the MAP assignment of

i.e., all the nodes for which

, and

stands for all corresponds to the index of highest entry of

. In general,

variable nodes that are neighbors of factor node .

convergence is not guaranteed, and the MAP assignment can be

We shall focus on the two inference tasks of computing recovered only for specific problems, [65], [2], [24], [47].

marginal probabilities and maximum a priori (MAP) as-

signment. The computation of the marginal probabilities

and

, requires the

summation over the states of all the variable nodes not in or

, respectively. This computation is generally hard because

it may require summing up exponentially large number of

terms—thus one seeks efficient ways or approximate solutions

for the marginals. The MAP assignment is the task of finding

a state for each that brings the maximal value to the joint

probability

.

The BP algorithms, known as sum-product and max-product,

are two algorithms for computing marginal probability and

MAP assignment, respectively, that can be described in terms

A. Inference Using a Variational Principle

The BP algorithms apply to tree-structured factor graphs

yet are well defined for general factor graphs but without

convergence or accuracy guarantees. The variational principle

approach, described below, is a decade long effort at providing

an extended platform from which old, i.e., BP algorithms, and

new (preferably convergent) algorithms can emerge.

The variational approach seeks a distribution

that is as close as possible, in relative entropy terms, to the

product potentials

and

. Expanding the KL-diver-

gence

between two non-

negative vectors results in

of operations on a factor graph. As already mentioned in the in-

troduction, the BP algorithms will deliver the correct inference,

i.e., are exact, if the factor graph has no cycles, but are still well

defined and often provide good approximate results when the where factor graph has cycles.

is the so-called Gibbs-Helmholtz free-energy

The BP algorithms are defined in terms of messages between

variable and factor nodes. The message

from factor

node to variable node , and the opposite direction message , is a vector over the states of . In the sum-product
algorithm those have the following form:

The term and

(2)

is the entropy and

. The linear term

is often re-

ferred to as the energy term. By minimizing over the prob-

ability simplex

, we get back

the probability distribution defined in (1), as the optimal argu-

ment

, and minus the log of the normal-

ization, or equivalently the partition function, as the value at the

minimum The indicates that one can normalize the vector. The mes-

sages

are usually initialized to the uniform vector.

Upon convergence of the message-passing scheme the marginal

probabilities

and

can be expressed in terms of a

“pseudo-distribution”, also known as beliefs,

and

defined as follows:

Since

is strictly convex and the simplex constraints are

convex, the minimum is unique. So far we have not gained any-

thing because the entropy

is computationally intractable

since its evaluation is exponential in , and satisfying the

probability simplex constraints is intractable as well. The vari-

ational methods are based on a tractable approximation to the

free-energy

by: i) approximating the entropy term

by a combination of local entropies over marginal probabilities

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6297

,

and ii) by approximating the probability simplex

constraints by the so-called “marginal consistency” constraints.

In approximate inference, the true marginal distributions

and

are replaced by “beliefs”

and

which form a “pseudo distribution” in the sense that the beliefs

might not necessarily arise as marginals of some distribution

. The probability simplex constraints are replaced

by marginal consistency constraints

defined as follows:

The entropy approximation

as a function of the beliefs

is known as fractional entropy and has the form

(3)

where the joint entropy

and the local entropy

.

For factor-graphs without cycles, the setting of

and

where is the degree of the variable node associated

with in the factor graph, renders the approximation to be

exact and equal1 to the entropy . Such an approximation is

known as the Bethe entropy

Moreover, in the case of a tree, the marginal consistency con-

straints

are equal to the probability simplex constraints,

thus making the constrained Bethe free-energy problem

the algorithm correspond to stationary points of the variational problem. This does not mean that the sum-product algorithm descends on the Bethe free energy (in fact it does not), but that near a fixed point things start to behave well. The significance of the observation is that it ties the popular sum-product algorithm with a specific variational principle and moreover it suggests a framework for seeking natural generalizations of the Bethe approximation with their associated message-passing algorithms.
Generalizations of the Bethe free-energy move along two thrusts. The first employs better (higher-order) approximations to the entropy and higher-order constraints beyond the marginal consistency constraints to better approximate the full probability simplex constraints. This effort includes Kikuchi free energy, region graphs, and other hyper-graph based methods [70], [29]. The second thrust looks for convergence guaranteed message-passing algorithms by extending the Bethe free energy to form a wider class of functions, known as convex free energies, which are convex in the intersection of marginal consistency constraints. In this paper we focus on the second thrust. The inclusion of Kikuchi approximations and region graphs is a natural extension to the results we introduce in this paper but for the sake of clarity we leave it outside the current scope.
The fractional entropy (3) can be set to form a family of concave approximations. The set of sufficient conditions for an entropy approximation of the type of (3) to be concave over the set of constraints was introduced in [21], [66] and take the following form:

Definition 1 (Concave Entropy Approximation): An approxi-

mate entropy term of the form (3) is strictly concave over the set

of marginal consistency constraints if there exists ,

and

such that

and

. The approximate entropy

becomes

a convex optimization producing the true marginals

and

. The constrained optimization is de-

fined in terms of beliefs only and is therefore computationally

tractable. However, if the factor graph has cycles, the minimizer

of the constrained Bethe free energy is not guaranteed to corre-

spond to the true marginals ,

, and not even realiz-

able as a true distribution. Therefore, for general factor graphs,

the Bethe free-energy optimization approach finds an approxi-

mation to the true marginal probabilities. From the optimization

point of view, the Bethe free energy is strictly convex in the in-

tersection of constraints when the factor graph is a tree. When

the factor graph has cycles, the Bethe energy is nonconvex, and

although it is possible to derive convergent algorithms to local

(4)

The entropy approximation

includes the Bethe approx-

imation when

,

, and

, but it is

guaranteed to be strictly concave for any setting of the param-

eters where ,

and

. An important member of

this class is the TRW approximation [63] where is equal to

a weighted combination of spanning trees of the original graph

(all factors are pairwise and thus represents an edge) which

pass through . In Appendix D we describe a number of con-

cave settings of including TRW and other heuristic settings.

The convex-free-energy variational program becomes

minima of the Bethe function [71], [22], the computational cost

(5)

is large and thus has not gained popularity.

What makes the Bethe free-energy optimization interesting

is the observation, first elucidated by [70], that when the The global minimizer of the convex-free-energy program

sum-product algorithm converges then it does so to a stationary above is an approximation to the marginal probabilities due to: i)

point of the constrained Bethe free energy, i.e., fixed-points of the term is an approximation to the entropy of the distribution

1in this case the joint probability can be expressed solely in terms of the

marginals p(x ; . . . ; x ) =

p(x )= p(x ) . Expanding H(p)

produces the Bethe entropy approximation.

and its quality depends on how the parameters , , are set

and on the structure of the factor graph and ii) the marginal con-

sistency constraints

approximate the probability simplex

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

constraints, there is no guarantee that in general form a distri-

bution, i.e., the marginal estimations

and

might

not arise from any probability distribution over

.

The only guarantees we have is that if the factor graph has

no cycles then the marginal probabilities are exact and if is

strictly concave then it should be possible to generate a conver-

gent message-passing algorithm (unlike BP algorithms which

are not generally convergent).

We move next to the MAP assignment task where one seeks a

vector which maximizes the product of potentials, or equiv-

alently minimizes the energy

An alternative class of methods are based on a (strictly) convex relaxation approach. There are two notable recent examples in this class: one using a proximal minimization technique where the convex term is a weighted KL-divergence measure between the sought-after belief vector and the one from the previous iteration [45]. The proximal minimization approach involves a double-loop of message passing iterations and is guaranteed to converge to the global optimum of (6). The second approach, the one we follow in this paper, is to make (6) the “zero temperature” of the perturbed problem
(7)

Described as a variational principle program, the MAP as-

signment problem is equivalent to the linear program whose

variables corresponds to distribution

with expo-

nential many elements

The optimization of a linear function over the probability sim-

plex yields an optimal solution in an extreme point of the

probability simplex, namely is a zero-one distribution. In

particular

and for every

holds

.

An approximation can be obtained by approximating the

marginal probabilities

and

with beliefs

and

which are not guaranteed to correspond to a true

distribution over

(6)

by taking

. This approach was used in decoding low-den-

sity parity-check codes [61]. It was also used for LP-relaxations,

to derive a nonconvergent max-product like algorithm [66], and

for applying an iterative proportional fitting type algorithm [26].

This concludes the necessary background to inference within

the framework of variational principle. The variational problem

we will work on next is (7). We will derive a convergent mes-

sage-passing algorithm called the norm-product. When the pa-

rameters of are set to the Bethe approximation the algorithm

reduces to the sum-product (when

) or the max-product

(when ). When is concave and

the norm-product

becomes a globally convergent message-passing algorithm, re-

ferred to as convex-sum-product, for approximating marginal

probabilities. When

, we obtain a convergent form of

max-product we call convex-max-product and when

, we

obtain an approximation (with proven bounds) to the LP-relax-

ation solution.

If the minimizer of the LP-relaxation problem comes out

III. NORM-PRODUCT BELIEF PROPAGATION ALGORITHM

without ties, i.e., the marginal vectors

have a single

maximal entry, then the MAP assignment readily emerges

from the LP-relaxed solution. This LP-relaxed problem can

be solved using off-the-shelf LP solvers but the key problem

with standard LP solvers, however, is that they do not use the

graph structure explicitly and thus are suboptimal in terms

of computational efficiency. An empirical study found the

message-passing LP-solvers, e.g., max-TRBP, to be superior

to the CPLEX solver, a commercial LP solver that implements

different techniques for solving LP, such as primal and dual

simplex solvers, network solvers, primal-dual barrier solver for

sparse problem, and sifting techniques executing sequences of

LP subproblems [68].

The relaxed LP problem of (6) has been widely studied in the

literature in the context of message-passing algorithms. Special

cases of these LP-relaxations were used for constraints satisfac-

We seek an algorithm for minimizing the inference varia-

tional (7) with the following properties: i) if the entropy approx-

imation term is strictly concave, i.e., (7) is a convex-free-en-

ergy, the algorithm will be convergent for all

and will

converge to the global optimum when ; ii) the algorithm will

remain well defined when is nonconvex (such as Bethe-free-

energy and other fractional entropy approximations) and exhibit

the property that fixed points of the algorithm coincide with sta-

tionary points of (7); and iii) the algorithm uses the graph struc-

ture inherent sparseness, i.e., is defined by a message-passing

architecture on the underlying factor-graph. In other words, like

the BP-algorithms, our scheme should be sending messages be-

tween variable and factor nodes of the factor graph.

We will first take a detour and derive a general framework for

minimizing problems of the type

tion [48], [34]. The general form in (6) was studied using tree de-

(8)

compositions in [64], [30], as well as dual decomposition [32],

[33], and dual block coordinate ascent [67], [18], [52]. A general

framework for these recent developments is described in [37]. where

is a strictly convex, nonsmooth, extended-valued

Since the LP energy is not strictly convex, convergence to the function of the type

where is essen-

global minimum is a challenge, since (6) usually corresponds to tially smooth and is the indicator function of the affine set

a nonsmooth dual. In this case, a dual block coordinate ascent

, namely,

if

and other-

can lead to a corner in the dual objective, which is a nonoptimal wise. The functions

are convex extended-valued functions

stationary point.

(see Appendix A on mathematical background). In Appendix B,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6299

we derive the following “primal-dual” block ascent algorithm which is guaranteed to converge to the global minimizer of (8).

Algorithm 1 (Primal-Dual Ascent) Let

where

is strictly convex, essentially smooth

extended-valued function, and let

be convex

extended-valued functions.

when are nonconvex but defined over an affine domain the algorithm is no longer convergent, but if it does converge it will do so to a stationary point of the optimization problem. This property of the algorithm extends the result of [70] about the behavior of the sum-product algorithm: if it converges, then it converges to a stationary point of the Bethe free-energy.
The inference variational problem presented in (7) is embedded into the general template of (8) as follows:

Initialize

.

1) Repeat until convergence:

2) For

:

a)

b)

c) Output .

(9)

where

is arbitrary.

where

with being the set of

where is the probability simplex (ar-

rays that are nonnegative and sum to one), and is defined as

follows:

(10)

The vectors and are messages passed along edges of

a bipartite graph with (function) nodes corresponding to the Note that

include all

, i.e.,

for

functions

and (variable) nodes corresponding to the

. The functions are defined as follows:

dimension of . Function node sends the coordinates of

vector to the variable nodes. Variable node sends the

’th coordinate of vectors

to the functions nodes.

The algorithm iteratively optimizes with respect to the indexes

(11)

, stopping when it does not change the beliefs where

is the affine set consisting of for every

, thus the network proceeds in an almost cyclic update policy.

, which live in the probability simplex, i.e.,

The algorithm fits well with a graphical model architecture in

, and satisfy the marginal consis-

the sense that if

depends only on a small subset

of tency constraints

. Note that are

coordinates from , then

for every

(and not explicitly included in

, but they are described by

therefore need not be updated).

the values of which all in the domain of agree upon.

Claim 1: Assume variables are indexed by

and Given the sparse structure of then, following Claim 1, we

depends only on small subset of variables indexed by present the entries of according to the factor-graph structure

and let

. Then,

for all by setting

(and likewise ). Step (b) of Al-

.

gorithm 1 is reduced to finding for all

and step (c)

The claim and its proof can be found in Appendix B. For those updates by the rule

familiar with successive projection schemes, in the particular

case when

, i.e., is strictly convex and essentially

smooth, and

(the indicator function of convex

set ), the update step (b) for Algorithm 1 is a “Bregman” pro-

jection [6] of the vector onto the convex set . In that case,

following some algebraic manipulations (such as eliminating

among other manipulations) the scheme (with

) reduces

to the well known Dykstra [12] (also goes under different names

such as Hildreth, Bregman, Csiszar, Han) successive projection

algorithm which has its origins in the work of Von-Neumann

for an arbitrary . If instead of updating , we would update the additive degree of freedom
inherent in the choice of turns into a scaling choice of . The derivation process required for embedding the definitions
above into the primal dual Algorithm 1 is described in detail in Appendix C. The resulting algorithm, we call norm-product, is presented in Fig. 1.

[43]. Further historical details can be found in Appendix B.

Another useful property of the algorithm that it is well defined

for nonconvex primal energies. Specifically, we can establish the

following result.

Claim 2: Consider Algorithm 1 for Legendre-type function

and nonconvex continuously differentiable functions

restricted to the affine domain

, and

assume in step (c) is in the interior of

. Then,

Just as in the BP algorithms, the message

from the

factor node to the variable node is a vector over all possible

states of . The message

from the variable node

to the factor node is an array over all possible states of .

The beliefs

, which are the approximations to the marginal

probability

when

, can be computed from the mes-

sages

:

fixed-points of the algorithm coincide with stationary points of

the nonconvex program

. The proof can be

(12)

found in Appendix A and Appendix B. The result states that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

m x L c c 0 d c Fig. 1. Norm-product BP algorithm, where the messages

( ) are computed with respect to the

norm. For = 1, = 1 , = 0 it

  c  reduces to the BP algorithms, sum-product when = 1 and max-product when = 0. Whenever is the weighted number of spanning trees through edge ,

c 0 c c c > c c  and = 1

and = 0 it reduces to the tree-reweighted BP algorithms (sum-TRBP and max-TRBP). Whenever

0, ,

0 the

> norm-product is guaranteed to converge, and if also 0 it converges to the global optimum of the program in (7).

where is defined in Fig. 1. The joint beliefs computed from the messages

can be

(13)

The norm-product algorithm includes the BP algorithms

(sum-product and max-product), as well as sum-TRBP [63],

max-TRBP [64], and NMPLP [18] as particular cases. These

algorithms relate to the simpler form of the norm-product algo-

rithm, when

. In this setting, the messages

depend solely on the local potentials

and the messages

. Therefore, the messages

can be written

in the compact form

, replacing with . In this

case, the norm-product algorithm in Fig. 1 takes the form

messages

of the norm-product algorithm in Fig. 1 de-

pends on a single message

and whenever

the

message

depends only on the messages

for every

, which we abbreviate by

. Substi-

tuting the value of into

we obtain the pairwise norm-

product, whose update rule consists only of the messages

.

When

the pairwise norm-product algorithm with

takes the form

The sum-TRBP [63] is a special case. The sum-TRBP sets as

the relative number of spanning trees of the graph which include

the edge , and sets

. As a result,

and by substitution

, we obtain

the sum-TRBP update rule as originally introduced in ([63, eq.

(39)])

When

the pairwise norm-product algorithm with

takes the form

When using the norm-product with the Bethe entropy approx-

imation

,

,

there holds

and

the algorithm reduces to

The max-TRBP [64] and NMPLP [18] are special cases, de-

rived as follows: With max-TRBP, we have and defined

by the TRW setting which results in

, and the Max-

TRBP ([64, eq. (50)]) follows from the substitution

. The NMPLP is another recent max-product-like al-

gorithm where messages

are defined as follows:

which is the sum-product algorithm for

and the max-

product algorithm for

.

When the factors corresponds to pairwise interactions

where

. The pairwise norm-product message

the messages of norm-product algorithm

and

with the setting

and

for

can be written by the shorthand notation

and . The every

gives rise to

. Thus, with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6301

= 1 ( ) Fig. 2. Sum-product BP type algorithm, attained from the norm-product BP when  , where the messages m x are computed with the L

norm.

= 1 = 1 0 = 0 For c

,c

d ,c

it reduces to the sum-product BP algorithms, and whenever c is the weighted number of spanning trees through edge , and

= 1 0 = 0 0  0 c

c and c

it reduces to sum-TRBP. If c > , c , c

it reduces to the convex-sum-product algorithm, which is guaranteed to

reach the global optimum of the convex free energy.

substitution

and unit local potentials

, we obtain the NMPLP message above.

The result of having the BP, TRBP and NMPLP algorithms

arise as special cases of the norm-product algorithm underscores

the generality of our derivation. However, the more interesting

potential in the norm-product algorithm is the emergence of

new message-passing schemes which are guaranteed to con-

verge (unlike the BP and TRBP algorithms) corresponding to

the setting of as a concave function

.

Three classes of algorithms emerge.

• The convex-sum-product corresponding to the setting

in the norm-product algorithm. The convex-sum-product

is guaranteed to converge to the global optimum of the

primal function (7). This includes the TRW free-energy in

particular and other settings of convex-free-energy which

are detailed in Appendix D.

• The approximate LP-relaxation corresponding to the set-

ting

(but ) in the norm-product algorithm.

It provides an approximate solution to the LP-relaxation

whose distance from the true solution is governed by an

upper-bound we derive. The approximate LP-relaxation is

guaranteed to converge to the global optimum of the primal

function (7).

• The convex-max-product corresponding to the setting

in the norm-product algorithm. Unlike the max-product,

the convex-max-product is convergence guaranteed. How-

ever, there is no guarantee that the recovered solution cor-

responds to the desired LP-relaxation solution. The advan-

tage of convex-max-product is efficiency (introduced by

instead of ) and very good empirical performance.

In fact, the convex-max-product is a convergent form of

max-product.

These message-passing algorithms, which are collectively re-

ferred to as convex-BP algorithms, are discussed in Section IV.

max-product

arise as special cases of the norm-product

algorithm. Since in both cases the free-energy approximation

is nonconvex (for factor graphs with cycles) the convergence

guarantees of those algorithms are weak. For the sum-product

we have the guarantee that if the algorithm convergence then it

will reach a stationary point of the free-energy approximation

(see Claim 2 and [70]). With the max-product we have weaker

guarantees (Claim 2 does not apply because is not strictly

convex when

) where specifically, even if the algorithm

does converge the marginal consistency constraints might not

be satisfied.

We focus now on the family of convex-free-energies which

arise with the setting

,,

. The convex-sum-

product arises from the setting

is described next.

A. Convex-Sum-Product Algorithm

As a free-energy approximation

, (7) is strictly convex

and, in turn, the norm-product algorithm is guaranteed to con-

verge to the global optimum. We refer to the specialization of

the norm-product algorithm with , ,

and

as convex-sum-product summarized in Fig. 2.

The beliefs

, which are the approximations to the mar-

ginal probability , and the joint beliefs

, which are

the approximation to the marginal probability

, are com-

puted from

Note that the algorithm has a much simpler form if

. The

message

depends only on and becomes

IV. THE CONVEX BELIEF PROPAGATION ALGORITHMS

(14)

Equation (7) represents the free-energy approximation when

, the LP relaxation when , and a perturbation of the The convex-sum-product is globally convergent for any concave

LP-relaxation for MAP estimation when

. When the en- setting of the entropy approximation , i.e., when

,,

tropy approximation term is the Bethe approximation (setting

. In particular, when the underlying factor-graph arises

,

,

in (4)) the sum-product

and from a graph, i.e., the local interaction forms pairwise relations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6302

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

= 0 ( ) Fig. 3. Max-product BP type algorithm, attained from the norm-product BP when  , where the messages m x are computed with the L norm.

= 1 = 1 0 = 0 For c

,c

d ,c

it reduces to the max-product BP algorithms. Whenever c is the weighted number of spanning trees through edge , and

= 10 = 0 = 1 = (10 ) 2 = 0 0  0 c

c and c

it reduces to max-TRBP. For c

,c

d = ,c

it reduces to the NMPLP algorithm. If c > , c , c

it reduces to the convex-max-product algorithm, which is a convergent max-product type algorithm for LP-relaxations.

only, there is a setting that corresponds to TRW free-energy

as described in Appendix D. We also describe there additional

parameter settings corresponding to other heuristic convex ap-

proximations of the entropy term .

We describe next the use of the norm-product algorithm as

an approximation to the LP-relaxation for the MAP problem by

taking

.

B. LP-Relaxation Bounds

For , let the global optimum of (7) (with con-

cave ) denoted by and let the solution of the LP

relaxation (6) denoted by . Let stand for the con-

catenated functions

and

, i.e.,

. We wish to

upper-bound the difference

where is a

function of , , and , described below.

Proposition 1: Let

,,

describe a convex-

free-energy (7). Let stand for the cardinality of and

be the cardinality of . Then

where

Proof: The sets of beliefs , are both in the local poly-

tope , whereas the beliefs are the optimal ones with

respect to the original linear program (6), therefore

. On the other hand, the beliefs are optimal for the per-

turbed program (7); hence,

where

is described in (4).

Using Jensen’s inequality, we obtain

As a result, in the ideal world, one could generate the solu-

tion arbitrarily close to the relaxed LP solution . There

are, however, numerical accuracy limitations which in practice

limit the size of

. The assumption in Proposition 1

is that the output

of the norm-product algorithm, as de-

fined in (12) and (13), is equal to the solution to the -per-

turbed LP-relaxation (7). This is indeed true when but not

when

. As we shall see in more detail in Section V, the

norm-product algorithm is guaranteed to converge when

but not necessarily to the minimal primal value. Therefore, from

a numerical perspective there exists such that when the

underlying assumption

ceases to hold. Moreover,

the value of depends on the graph structure and the poten-

tial functions and therefore is unlikely to have a simple and

useful form.

C. Convex-Max-Product Algorithm

We saw that for the setting of

and when equals the

Bethe entropy approximation then the norm-product becomes

the max-product algorithm. We now explore the convex-free-en-

ergy setting

,,

while

and refer to the

resulting family of algorithms as convex-max-product summa-

rized in Fig. 3.

Note that when

we obtain a much simpler form of

the algorithm where the message

depends only on

described in (14)

Algorithm 5 (Convex-Max-Product When

)

Repeat until convergence:

1) For

and for all

do:

and likewise

. Substituting in (4) and noting that

, we obtain

The desired output vector

is recovered from computing

the vector

as follows. If there are

no ties,

is determined by setting the highest value to 1

and all remaining entries to 0. If the highest value of the vector

is shared among

entries, i.e., there exist ties, then those

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6303

entries receive the value . If there are no ties, i.e.,

We conclude that the convex-max-product, unlike

for

, then the result is the MAP solution.

max-product, is convergence guaranteed, since it iteratively

The setting

raises two issues: i) if the algorithm con- improves the dual objective which is bounded by the primal

verges, can one obtain from them the optimal LP-relaxation so- objective. The convex max-product is guaranteed to recover the

lution? and ii) is there a convergence guarantee of the convex- MAP assignment if its beliefs are integral. However, in many

max-product family? The answer to the first question is gener- cases we can use the rounding scheme for the max-product type

ally negative. In a nutshell, the primal function is convex algorithms which guarantees the MAP if the beliefs recovered

but no longer strictly convex and therefore the dual function is from the messages are without ties [66].

no longer differentiable. A dual ascent approach on a nondifferentiable dual function can get stuck at “corners”. The impli-

V. EXPERIMENTS

cation of getting stuck at a corner of the energy landscape is

that the recovered primal solution

might not correspond

to the lowest primal energy and furthermore might not satisfy

the marginal consistency constraints. More details can be found

In our experiments, we first evaluated the quality of the maxproduct type algorithms for solving a linear program with pairwise interactions and binary variables

in Appendix B.

We consider now the the second question of whether the dual

ascent creates a converging sequence? The answer is positive, i.e., the convex-max-product algorithm is convergent (unlike max-product on general graphs).

Theorem 1 (Convergence, Convex-Max-Product): The norm-

product algorithm with the parameter setting of and ,

,

is convergent.

Proof: Let

represent the conjugate dual

(21)

The max-product type algorithms differ from each other by

their approximated entropy coefficients , , , but since

the linear program has no entropy terms, all these algorithms

aim at producing the same result. We distinguish between three

families of max-product type algorithms.

• The first family corresponds to nonconcave entropy ap-

proximation, such as the Bethe free energy whose coef-

ficients

,

and

produce the

max-product algorithm. These algorithms are not guaran-

teed to converge and even if they converge there are no

guarantees on their solution.

and let

be the limit of as

form of the conjugate duals and are

. The explicit

• The second family corresponds to concave entropy approx-

imations with positive , negative and

. The

notable member of this family is the max-TRBP algorithm

(15)

[64], whose is the weighted number of spanning trees

which pass through the edge and

.

These max-product type algorithms are not guaranteed to

converge, but whenever they converge one can extract an

optimal solution for a pairwise linear program with binary

(16)

variables, cf. [31, Theorem 4] and [38, Corollary 2].

• The third family corresponds to concave entropy approxi-

where

. The functions

mation with , ,

. These convex-max-product al-

and

are well defined and thus

gorithms are guaranteed to converge to the global optimum

for a pairwise linear program with binary variables, cf. [38,

Corollary 2] and [18, Prop. 3].

We used the implementation of the max-product type algo-

rithm described in Algorithm 4, while each algorithm differs

is well defined as well. By definition of the block ascent in its appropriate , , . To evaluate the performance of

scheme, let

. We note that the algorithms we generated 100 samples of 10 10 grids,

is well defined because appears as a norm where and were sampled from zero mean Gaussians

in the definition of the message We use the shorthand
that Assume, to the contrary, that

.
. We .

instead of wish to show
and let in-

with standard deviation of one. We set the local evidence ac-

cording to

, and for the pairwise interactions

we set the value on their diagonal and

on

their off-diagonal.

First we investigated the convergence properties of three rep-

stead

, thus making

. resentatives of the max-product families described above: The

Since have

, there exists such that for all

, we max-product algorithm, the max-TRBP described in [64], and

as well. Likewise, using the limit argu- the convex max-product with the same TRW free energy, rep-

ment on the right-hand side,

. Finally, since resented by , ,

as described in Appendix D. The

, and is continuous, we have

convergence criterion for the max-product and max-TRBP algo-

, which contradicts the fact that

. rithms was measured with respect to change in their messages,

whereas the convergence criterion for the convex-max-product

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

was measured with respect to change in its dual function. The runs the dual value of the linear program attained by the

max-product algorithm converged for 25% of the runs, the max- convex-max-product messages was 0.1 lower than the one

TRBP converged for 90% of the runs, and as expected from The- attained by the convex-norm-product messages, indicating the

orem 1 the convex-max-product always converged. However, convex-max-product reached a nonmaximal dual value. This

the convex max-product was slower than max-TRBP, while we fact has important practical implications: Only from the dual

measured the primal values obtained by both algorithms during optimal solution one can recover the optimal beliefs that solve

their runs. Over the runs, the max-TRBP converged in average the primal linear program, while nonoptimal dual messages

number of 430 iterations compared to an average of 6400 of the always relate to nonconsistent beliefs. In particular for the

convex-max-product with TRW parameters.

25% of the runs the convex-max-product did not produce

Next we compared the run-time of three representatives of the beliefs which agree on their marginal probabilities, whereas the

converging max-product: The convex-max-product with TRW convex-norm-product always recover beliefs which satisfy the

free energy, the NMPLP of [18] and the convex-max-product primal linear program constraints.

with

,

,

which was referred as “trivial In our experiments, we also evaluated the sum-product type

convex-max-product” by [66]. We measured their convergence algorithms for approximating the marginal probabilities of dis-

with respect to the change in their dual objective: The NMPLP tribution of the form

converged in average number of 200 iterations, the trivial

convex-max-product converged in average of 260 iterations,

and the convex-max-product with TRW free energy converged

in average of 6400 iterations.

To conclude, for linear programs with pairwise interactions

and binary variables the convex-max-product algorithms im-

prove upon previous max-product type algorithms: They are

guaranteed to converge to the global optimum. However the

convex-max-product algorithms differ from each other in their

memory requirements and run-time. Among those algorithms,

the ones with

requires less memory, as their messages

depend only on , and have a faster run-time.

The norm-product family of algorithms can also solve linear

program using the perturbation method for a small value of ,

as described in Proposition 1. However the convex-max-product

algorithms are computationally more efficient, and guaranteed

converge to the global optimum of linear program with pair-

wise interactions and binary variables. Therefore we evaluate

the convex-norm-product type algorithms over linear programs

with nonbinary variables

The variational framework for approximating marginal proba-

bilities, described in Section II-A, suggests that the approxi-

mated entropy term affects the quality of the approximated mar-

ginal probabilities. Although we do not have a theoretical guar-

antee for setting the best approximation, in these experiments

we show how the different approximations behave in practice.

We consider two types of free-energy approximations:

• Nonconvex free-energy approximations, represented by

the Bethe approximation which corresponds to

,

,

. The sum-product algorithm aims

at finding a local minimum for the Bethe free-energy

approximation, but it is not guaranteed to converge. In

cases where it does not converge, we used the double-loop

algorithm [22] in libDAI [40], which is guaranteed to

converge to a stationary point of the Bethe free energy.

• Free-energy approximations which are convex in the inter-

section of the marginalization constraints. These approxi-

mations are appealing since their stationary points are their

global minimum. We address the TRW free-energy ap-

For these programs, the convex-norm-product algorithms are

proximations whose , , correspond to spanning

guaranteed to converge to the global optimum, whereas the

trees in the graph, and also to convex free-energy ap-

convex-max-product can converge to nonoptimal stationary

proximation heuristic described in Appendix D. We note

point. To evaluate the performance of the convex-norm-product

that whenever , ,

, the corresponding convex-

we generated 100 samples of 10 10 grid where

and

sum-product algorithms are guaranteed to converge to the

were sampled from zero-mean Gaussians with standard

global optimum.

deviation of one, and

were given the value on We used the implementation of the sum-product type algo-

their diagonal and

on their off-diagonal.

rithm described in Algorithm 3, while each algorithm differs

We measured how often the convex-max-product algorithm in its appropriate , , . Following [63] We generated 100

converges to nonoptimal stationary points, comparing to the samples of 10 10 grids with binary variables

,

convex-norm-product which always achieves its optimum as where were uniformly chosen from the interval

,

described in Claim 7. To indicate these events we compared and were either chosen uniformly from the attractive in-

the dual value of the linear program, which is evaluated terval

or the mixed interval

. We ran the simula-

by the convex-max-product stationary messages and by the tions with edge strength ranging from 0 to 2. We set the local

convex-norm-product messages, setting

and

, evidence to

, and for the pairwise interactions

,

. For 60% of the runs, the dual values attained

we set the value on their diagonal and

on

by the convex-max-product and the convex-norm-product were their off-diagonal.

0.01 close to each other, indicating both algorithms reached We compared to true marginal probabilities with the

the maximal dual value. On the other hand, for 25% of the approximated marginal probabilities recovered from the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6305

Fig. 5. Comparison of error in marginal probabilities on a complete graph, es-
timated by TRW free-energy approximation and L convex free-energy approx-
imation. The graphs present the average error over 100 random trials.

Fig. 4. Comparison of error in marginal probabilities, estimated by Bethe free
energy, TRW free energy and L convex free energy described in Appendix D.
We computed the Bethe approximation by applying the sum-product when converged, and the double-loop algorithm otherwise. The other free-energy approximations are convex and the convex-sum-product algorithm is guaranteed to converge to their optimum. The graphs present the average error over 100 random trials.

Bethe free-energy approximation, TRW free-energy approx-

imation, and the convex free-energy heuristic. Fig. 4

shows the average error in the marginal probabilities .
We conclude from this experiment that the convex approximations are better than the Bethe approximation for the at-

Fig. 6. Run-time (in seconds) comparisons of convex-sum-product against a
2 = 2 3 . . . 10 conditional gradient descent solver (running on convex-L free energy). The
algorithms were applied to n n grids with n ; ; . Mean is shown
for 10 random trials.

tractive settings, when

. However, the Bethe approx-

imation is slightly better in the mixed settings for

and weighted number of spanning trees that go through the edges

considerably worse for . Moreover, in the mixed settings, , and negative

and

. How-

the sum-product did not converge for

and we used the ever, the same TRW free energy can be represented by , ,

double-loop algorithm instead which is computationally more

, as explained in Appendix D. These representations af-

expensive. We also conclude that the convex free-energy set- fect their corresponding sum-product type algorithms: The first

tings produce comparable results to TRW free energy for grids. representation corresponds to the sum-TRBP algorithm which is

We also compared the TRW and convex free-energy ap- not guaranteed to converge, whereas the second representation

proximated marginal probabilities on the complete graph, i.e., corresponds to the convex-sum-product which is guaranteed to

every two vertices are connected with an edge. We generated converge. However, the convex-sum-product was slower than

100 samples of complete graphs with 10 vertices with binary sum-TRBP, while we measured the primal values obtained by

variables, where were uniformly chosen from the interval both algorithms during their runs. Similar results were reported

, and were chosen uniformly from the interval in [17].

, for ranging from 0 to 2. Fig. 5 shows the average

Fig. 6 compares the running time of the convex-sum-product

error in marginal probability, suggesting that in the case of com- algorithm with a general convex solver performing conditional

plete graph, whose structure is far from a tree, the convex gradient descent on the primal energy function [4] which uses

approximation heuristic is better than the TRW approximation linear programming (LP) to find feasible search directions. We

for marginal probabilities estimation.

ran the algorithms on

grids where

. The

Generally, the same convex free energy can be represented by stopping criteria for all algorithms was the same and based on

different coefficients , , . In particular, the TRW free en- a primal energy difference of . For a 10 10 grid, for in-

ergy can be described by positive , which correspond to the stance, the general convex solver was slower by a factor of 20

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

(e.g., 306 seconds compared to 15.2). For a 2 2 grid, on the approximations similar to BP but in guaranteed (globally) con-

other hand, convex-sum-product took 0.15 seconds compared vergent framework.

1.41 seconds for the general convex solver. We conclude that In this work we limited the scope to factor graphs where the

the sum-product type algorithms converge faster than a general neighborhoods of every pair of factor nodes have at most a single

convex solver, since they exploit the structure of the graph.

intersection to give a clear description of the mathematical de-

tails presented in this work. However, the techniques presented

VI. DISCUSSION

here can also be used as a basis to a convex and nonconvex generalized BP [70]. Different algorithms were recently developed

We have presented a single unified message-passing frame-

work for approximate inference covering both marginal prob-

abilities estimation and the MAP assignment problem through

LP-relaxation. We took a general perspective on the existing BP

and TRBP algorithms and noted that all are reductions from the

basic optimization formula of

, where the function is

an extended-valued, strictly convex but nonsmooth and the func-

tions are extended-valued functions (not necessarily convex).

We used tools from convex duality to present the “primal-dual

ascent” algorithm which is an extension of the Bregman suc-

cessive projection scheme. Most of the details of this part of the

paper was pushed to Appendix B in order to reduce the overall

technical load for the main-body presentation.

We then mapped the fractional-free-energy variational

principal for approximate inference onto the optimization

structure

and introduced the “norm-product” mes-

sage-passing algorithm. Special cases of the norm-product

include sum-product and max-product (BP algorithms), TRBP

and NMPLP algorithms. When the fractional-free-energy is

set to be convex (convex-free-energy) the norm-product is

globally convergent for the estimation of marginal probabilities

(the convex-sum-product branch corresponding to

)

and for approximating the LP-relaxation

. We have

also introduced another branch of the norm-product which

arises as the “zero-temperature” of the convex-free-energy

which we referred to as the convex-max-product. The

convex-max-product is a convergent solver to the LP-relaxation

(unlike max-product) but is not guaranteed to reach the global

optimum.

As a general statement, the convex-free-energies provide a

way for obtaining approximate inference over general graphs.

There are two main issues in this regard: the first is how to

obtain a guaranteed globally convergent message-passing algo-

rithm for the general class of convex free energies, and secondly,

how to tune the energy parameters , , to a specific graph?

As for the first issue, we have provided a complete treatment

which also encompasses the existing BP and TRBP algorithms

(though they do not arise from a convex-free-energy but from

a nonconvex fractional-free-energy). As for the second issue,

we provided a simple algorithm for converting the conventional

TRW-free-energy settings to the convex-free-energy framework

and have also proposed a heuristic principle where among all

admissible parameters we choose the one most closest to the

for tightening the LP-relaxation [51], [53], [32] using intersec-

tions of increasingly larger clusters in order to recover the MAP

assignment. We believe similar techniques can be applied to

convex free energies in order to tighten the bound on the log-par-

tition function.

We did not discuss the parallel implementation of the norm-

product algorithm, but as every message-passing algorithm it

can be parallelized: One can distribute to the different parallel

units an independent set of vertices, i.e., vertices which are not

connected to each other in the graph. This mechanism preserves

the convergence and optimal guarantees of the algorithm. The

norm-product can also be made fully parallel, as it is a general-

ization of the BP algorithm, but in this case convergence is no

longer guaranteed. This can be fixed by methods described in

[19].

The convergence rate and the complexity analysis of the

norm-product algorithm were not addressed in this work. Since

the convex norm-product algorithm performs a dual block

ascent it has a linear convergence rate, whenever , , ,

(cf. [36, Theorem 5.1]), i.e., it achieves a -optimal

solution in

steps. However, this notation does not

capture the true complexity of the algorithm as

depends on unknown constants which can be very large. For

this purpose complexity bound were recently introduced,

where it was proved that the dual gradient ascent attains linear

complexity, (cf. [42, Theorem 2.1.13] and [58, Theorem 5.1]).

Although the convex norm-product can be modified to achieve

linear complexity its step size depends on , , and the

modified algorithm is inefficient compared to the convex

norm-product. We believe this is due to the fact that the convex

norm-product finds the optimal dual assignment in each step,

unlike the gradient methods. Generally, a complexity bound

for block coordinate ascent algorithms such as the convex

norm-product is an open problem.

Future work is also required for obtaining a firmer theoret-

ical understanding about how to set the concave entropy ap-

proximation, in order to guarantee a good approximation for the

marginal probabilities. For example, how tight is the TRW-en-

tropy bound, and whether one can find a family of trees which

guarantees the best bound? Clearly, these theoretical guarantees

must consider the potentials functions, since for every graph its

TRW-entropy can be made arbitrary close to the true entropy

for some potentials.

Bethe free energy (Appendix D). Empirical results show that for certain graphs, like a grid, we obtain very close marginal probability estimation results to those obtained by the TRW free

APPENDIX A MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND ON CONJUGATE DUALITY

energy. For complete graphs we obtain a very different free en- We consider the n-dimensional Euclidean space and de-

ergy from TRW and superior accuracy of marginal probability note vectors in bold face, e.g.,

. We start with a brief

estimation. The results suggest that our heuristic for setting up review of basic concepts of sets. A set is said to be closed if

the convex free energy satisfies what we were after, i.e., to get every of its limit points is contained the set. A set is called

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6307

open if its complement

is closed. The interior of a set ,

denoted by

, is the largest open set contained in . The

closure of a set, , is the smallest closed set containing .

A point is a boundary point of if

and

or equivalently if every neighborhood of contains at least one

point of and at least one point not of . A set is called

convex if it contains the line-segment between any two points

and in the set. That is, for every

the point

.

For our purposes, since we deal with low-dimensional sets

placed in higher-dimensional spaces, we use the concept of rel-

ative interior denoted by

which, defined intuitively, con-

tains all points which are not on the “edge” of the set, relative to

the smallest affine subspace in which this set lies. For example,

for a convex set ,

if and only if

there exists

and

such that

.

The graph of a function is the curve

, and define the epigraph of a function , denoted by

, as the set above its graph, namely

. A functions is called closed if its epigraph is a closed set.

A function is said to be convex if its epigraph is a convex set. A

function is called strictly convex if any line segment in its epi-

graph intersects with its relative interior. A twice differentiable

function is convex if its matrix of second derivatives, called the

Hessian, is positive semidefinite, and strictly convex if its Hes-

sian is positive definite.

In this paper, we work with functions that can take the value

of infinity and as such are nondifferentiable. Such functions are

known as extended-valued:

The sets

and

, are called the

closed half-spaces associated with the hyperplane

. We say that two sets , are separated by a hyperplane if

each set lies in a different closed halfspace associated with the

hyperplane. If a vector is a boundary point of a set , then a

hyperplane that contains the singleton and one of its halfs-

paces contains is said to be supporting at . In other words,

a supporting hyperplane is a hyperplane that “just touches” the

set . If is a convex set then there exists a supporting hyper-

plane for every point on its boundary. Supporting hyperplanes

play a role in the definition of the subgradient of a nondifferen-

tiable function. A vector is called a subgradient of a convex

proper function at if

(17)

This condition has a simple geometric meaning: it says that

the affine function

is a (nonver-

tical) supporting hyperplane to the convex set epi(f) at the point

. Consequently, the set of subgradients at , called

the subdifferential of at and is denoted by

, consists of

the supporting hyperplanes to the convex set epi(f) at the point

. When is differentiable at then the supporting hy-

perplane is unique and

.

Definition 4: The subdifferential of a function at a point

is denoted by

and consists of all the supporting hyper-

planes of epi(f) At the point , namely

Definition 2 (Extended-Valued, Proper): A function

is said to be extended real-valued if

. The ef-

fective domain of is denoted by

. A function is said to be proper if

, and it

obtains at least one finite value.

Proper functions typically arise when constraints are em-

bedded into finite valued functions. For example, the indicator

function associated with a convex set is defined by

when

and

otherwise. A possible use of the

indicator function is to constrain a finite valued function with

the set convex set to define a proper function

. We

define next the type of smoothness used throughout this paper.

Definition 3 (Essentially Smooth): Let be a proper and convex function differentiable throughout the nonempty set
. Then is called essentially smooth if whenever is a sequence in
converging to a boundary point in . Necessary and sufficient conditions for a function to be es-
sentially smooth are described in the following theorem.

Theorem 2 (Legendre Type): A closed and proper convex

function is essentially smooth if and only if it is differential

in its interior

, i.e.,

for every

, while

when

. If is also strictly

convex on it is called a convex function of Legendre type,

and its gradient mapping

is continuous and

one-to-one, and

.

Proof: [46, Theorems 26.1 and 26.5].

The following claim describes the subdifferential of the indi-

cator function associated with affine sets (a useful result which

will serve us later).

Claim 3: Let be

matrix and consider the affine set

and its indicator function

otherwise

Then

.

Proof: This claim results as a special case of [4, ex. 7.1.4].

For the sake of clarity, we provide a direct proof. We describe

the subdifferential

for every point in the domain of

, i.e.,

. To prove the direction

, we must show that

for

every . For every satisfying

this relation holds since

and

. For every with

this

relation holds since

.

To prove the other direction

we

must show that

only if

holds for every . First, we note that the set

is orthogonal to

, therefore if we assume on

the contrary that

there must be a vector

with

nonvanishing angle with , namely

therefore

Definition 4 does not hold for .

Claim 4: Consider a function whose domain is contained

in the affine set

. Then whenever

, there holds

for every .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

Proof:

can be equivalently written as

,

where is the indicator functions of the affine set , therefore

. From the linearity of the subdifferential, cf.

[4, Theorem 4.2.4], there holds

and the claim follows since

by assumptions,

and

from claim 3.

, and that the optimal value of the program is finite. The following form a primal-dual pair:
(19)
(20)

A supporting hyperplane at inition 4, Namely

with -slope Must Satisfy Def-

Then there is no duality gap and there exists primal-dual optimal

pair. Moreover, the vectors

form a primal-dual optimal

pair

if and only if the following “Algo-

rithmic Certificate” for optimality hold:

therefore it must hold that the -slope hyperplane supports the

epigraph at

, where

. This

leads to the definition of the Conjugate function:

Definition 5: The Fenchel-Legendre conjugate is:

Proof: The existence of primal-dual optimal pair follows from Theorem 3. The rest follows from [4, Theorem 6.2.5].

The conjugate

describes the offset of the -hyperplane

that supports the epigraph of . Note that regardless of the

structure of

its conjugate function

is closed and

convex, since it is the pointwise maximum of a collection of

affine (closed) functions. Furthermore, if is convex then the

conjugate of its conjugate returns back , i.e.,

(cf. [4,

Theorem 7.1.1]). The following claim is a useful result which

shall serve us later:

Claim 5: Let

, then

.

Proof: The definition of the Fenchel-Legendre conjugate

of

takes the form

which has the form in the claim since

.

The convex conjugate plays an important role in duality. Con-

sider constrained minimization under linear constraints

, i.e.,

with being the i’th row vector

of . The statement about the existence of Lagrange multiplier

for nondifferentiable functions is described next:

Theorem 3: (Lagrange Multipliers): Let be a proper convex function and consider the convex program

subject to

assume

intersect the linear constraints

and

that the optimal value of the program is finite. Then there exists

Lagrange multipliers

satisftying

Note that due to the linearity of the subdifferential , the optimality condition above is equivalent to .
To see the connection to Lagrangian duality, note that by definition of , we have

which in turn means that the primal-dual pair

satisfy

where the right-hand side is the

Lagrangian

and the dual problem is

, where

.

A proper convex function is; essentially strictly convex

if it is strictly convex on every convex subset in

. we

note below that in order for the dual function to be smooth the

primal must be strictly convex. A smooth dual is necessary for

a dual ascent scheme (described later).

Theorem 5: (Strict Primal Primal Smooth Dual): A closed proper convex function is essentially strictly convex if and only if its conjugate it essentially smooth.
Proof: [46], Theorem 26.3

We describe below two Fenchel duality theorems which are the functional form of the Lagrange duality where the constraints are implicit in the functions domains.

Theorem 6: Basic Fenchel Duality I: Let , be proper closed and convex functions and
, and the value of the program is finite. The following are primal and dual programs:

(18)

Proof: The assumptions 6.4.1 in [4] hold in this case and Then there is no duality gap, and there exists primal-dual op-

following the nonlinear Farkas lemma, as done in [4, Theorem timal pair. Moreover, the vectors

are primal-dual op-

6.4.2], completes the proof.

timal pair if and only if

and

.

The duality theorem using the conjugate below.

is described

Conversely, by reversing the roles of primal and dual, the vec-

tors

are primal-dual optimal pair if and only if

and

. in particular, if is essen-

Theorem 4: (Strong Duality): Let be a convex proper tially strictly convex and

is finite, then the optimal is

function and

intersects with the constraints

determined by

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6309

Proof: We reduce Fenchel duality to Lagrange duality in

Theorem 4, where we consider a decomposed version of the

primal function

subject to the linear

consistency constraints

. Note that the vector equality

constraint is composed from equality constraints where

is the length of the vectors and , therefore we expect to

use Lagrange multipliers vector of length . The Lagrangian

takes the form

and

using the conjugate notation in Definition 5 the dual function

takes the form in the Theorem above. Fol-

lowing Theorem 4 there exists primal-dual optimal pair which

must satisfy the feasibility condition, i.e.,

, and the Op-

timality Condition, namely

and

.

The theorem follows as the optimal must equal , as well as

. Reversing the roles of primal and dual are allowed by con-

vexity whereby

,

. Furthermore, since

is

finite Theorem 5 determines

to be smooth, and whenever

there must hold

.

The next theorem is generalizes the Fenchel duality theorem above.

Theorem 7: Basic Fenchel Duality II: Let be proper, closed and convex functions and and the optimal value of the program is finite.
The following are primal and dual programs:

Algorithm 6 (Dual Block Coordinate Ascent)

Initialize

1) Repeat until convergence:

2) For

:

a)

b)

Output

.

The dual block ascent algorithm iteratively improves the dual objective therefore is guaranteed to converge. Whenever is strictly convex in its domain its conjugate is essentially smooth and the dual block ascent is guaranteed to converge to the global optimum, as formally described below.

Theorem 8: (Dual Block Ascent): Let , be closed

convex functions and assume the relative interior of their

domains intersect. In addition, assume are continuous over

their domains and is strictly convex over its domain and

is finite. Then, the dual block ascent algorithm converges to the

dual and primal optimum.

In particular, if the dual sequence is bounded, then every of

its limit points is an optimal dual solution

. Also,

consider the primal sequence generated by

computed from the dual sequence, then this primal sequence is

bounded and its limit point is the optimal solution .

Proof: [57].

(21) APPENDIX B

PRIMAL-DUAL BLOCK ASCENT ALGORITHM

Then there is no duality gap, and there exists prima-dual optimal

pair. Moreover, the vectors

are primal-dual optimal

We describe an algorithm for solving programs of the form

pair if and only if

and

.

Also, if

is essentially strictly convex and

is finite,

then

.

Proof: The proof closely follows the one of Theorem 6

where we consider a decomposed version of the primal func-

tion

subject to the linear consistency con-

straints

. The Lagrangian takes the form

and the dual function takes

the form in the Theorem above. Following the Lagrange Du-

ality in Theorem 4, there exists primal-dual optimal pair which

must be primal feasible, i.e.,

, and satisfy the optimality

condition

and

. Whenever

is essentially strictly convex and

is finite, repeating

the primal-dual reversing argument of Theorem 6 shows that

.

while solving subproblems which consists of and a single

function

. In our framework, we include convex as well

as nonconvex optimization, but for now we describe the convex

settings, and later describe the necessary conditions for this op-

timization scheme for nonconvex programs. The dual block as-

cent method, described in Algorithm 6 decomposes the opti-

mization program to subproblems which solve a dual function

which requires the explicit computation of the conjugate func-

tions

and

—a task which is often algorithmically

unattractive or unfeasible. Instead, one can recover in Algo-

rithm 6 by solving its primal program and using the primal-dual

optimality condition in Theorem 6 as follows. Set

Algorithmically, minimizing the primal program

and

requires to take into account the domains of and which we obtain

simultaneously. Therefore, it is algorithmically appealing to program

and recall Claim 5, from , and solve the primal

solve the primal program in a piece-meal fashion using dual

block ascent, while iteratively improving a single vector .

(22)

This way one need to consider only subproblems that consists

of and a single . After we recover the optimal one

can recover efficiently the primal optimal by using the If the pair of functions

and

satisfy the assump-

smoothness of as describes in Theorem 7.

tions of Theorem 6, then the functions

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

and

satisfy these assumptions as well and, hence, can

be recovered from the optimality conditions of Theorem 6

(23)
Taken together, one obtains the primal form of the dual block ascent algorithm, in which one need not compute the conjugate functions:

Algorithm 7 (Primal-Dual Vanilla): Let the functions and satisfy the conditions of Theorem 8.

Initialize

.

1) Repeat until convergence:

2) For

:

a)

b)

c) Recover Output .

A useful property of the primal-dual algorithm (and its special

cases described in the sequel) is that the sparseness structure of

conforms to the local structure of the functions in the fol-

lowing sense: assume the variables are indexed by

,

and the function

depends on small subset of variables in-

dexed by

, then contains information

only for

and the remaining entries vanish.

Claim 6 (Locality of Dual Variables): Assume variables

are indexed by

and

depends only on a subset

of variables indexed by

, then the following

hold:

setting, however, is more constrained than the setting described

in Theorem 8. In particular, the function

where

is essentially smooth and

is an affine set.

Since is nondifferentiable, the dual is not strictly convex, and

thus we cannot expect to be uniquely defined. Nevertheless,

we show below that has a convenient and simple form.

Claim 7: Let

where is essentially

smooth and

and assume that

. Assume the functions

and

satisfy the assumptions of Theorem 6. Then for

every real vector the subgradient

is optimal dual, i.e., satisfies (23).

Proof: Theorem 6 ensures the existence of a primal-dual

pair

which satisfy (23). The domains of and

are contained in by assumption, therefore by Claim 4

meaning that for every the subgradient

is dual

optimal. From linearity of the subdifferential we have

. Following Claim 3, the subdifferential is

represented by vectors in the linear subspace spanned by the

columns of , denoted by

. Using again the linearity of

the subdifferential, we deduce

is a dual optimal subgradient. The Claim follows by replacing .

Algorithm 8 (Primal-Dual Ascent): Let the functions and

satisfy the conditions of Theorem 8 where in addition

let

, where is essentially smooth,

and

.

Proof: Consider the decomposition of to two parts

, where

is the complement

, and likewise for the subgradient .

Following Definition 4, if

, then

(24)

Initialize

1) Repeat until convergence:

2) For

:

a)

b)

The linear term

decomposes to the sum of

and

. Since is

c) Output .

arbitrary, we can choose

where

is set

to

for some arbitrary scalar

,

and

is arbitrary. Equation (24) then becomes

Claim 8 (Convergence): Algorithm 8 converges to the dual and primal optimum. Moreover, its primal sequence converges to the primal optimal point and whenever its dual sequence

is bounded every of its limit point is an optimal dual solution

.

for all . If we assume to the contrary that

, then

we can increase the value of and thus make the right-hand side

of the equation arbitrarily high, while not effecting the left-hand

side since

is independent of by the claim assumption (as

depends only on the variables indexed by )—in contra-

Proof: Algorithm 8 implicitly performs dual block ascent

and the dual sequence it generates is identical to the dual se-

quence generated by Algorithm 6 therefore inherits the features

described in Theorem 8. Theorem 8 relates with the primal

sequence describe in Theorem 8 by

.

diction to

.

The special case of Algorithm 8 when

, where

The primal-dual algorithm is still unattractive as it requires is a convex set, and is essentially smooth, i.e.,

, can be

the evaluation of the subdifferentials of and which could mapped [by eliminating step 2(a)] to a successive Bregman pro-

be as difficult as the computation of the conjugate functions. Our jection algorithm [6], [7] which is also known under the names

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6311

of Dykstra, Hildreth, Han and Csiszar. This class of iterative

projection schemes has a long history starting from Von-Neu-

mann in the 50s [43] who introduced the case where

and are affine sets. In that case, the primal solution

is to find the projection of onto the intersection of the affine

sets

and the subproblem in (22) corresponds to the

projection of onto the affine set . Hildreth [23] extended the

problem with open half spaces

. Bregman

[5] extended Hildreth’s problem setup by including any strictly

convex function . The special case of Entropy projections was

introduced later by Csiszar [10], as -projections. Dykstra [12],

[11] was the first to introduce general convex sets (i.e., going

beyond affine sets or half-spaces) but limited the treatment to

representing the Euclidean norm and the KL divergence. The

view of the algorithm with general essentially smooth and

convex sets as performing successive Bregman projections

is due to [7], [6].

Algorithm 8 extends the body of iterative schemes mentioned

above along three directions: i) is extended to nonsmooth

functions which in turn makes nonuniquely defined; ii) as

a result is defined up to an additive term which in the context

of the message-passing norm-product algorithm (and its special

cases) translates to the normalization of the messages ;

and iii) our algorithm has two auxiliary variables, and ,

which allows a straightforward mapping onto a message-map-

ping framework and complies with the local structure of the un-

derlying graph (Claim 1).

1) Non-Convex Case: So far both and were convex,

yet Algorithm 8 is still well defined when the functions are

nonconvex. The purpose of this section is to clarify what can

be guaranteed under such conditions. We will show that indeed

there is no convergence guarantees, but if the algorithm does

converge then it will do so to a stationary point of the primal

program.

To minimize the program

, one must in-

troduce Lagrange multipliers

. Whenever

and

are convex the Lagrange multipliers are the arguments of

the dual function, and recovering amounts to improving the

dual objective with its best -arguments, therefore this proce-

dure is guaranteed to converge. When are nonconvex, the La-

grange multipliers do not correspond to a dual function, and thus

recovering amounts to finding a stationary point with respect

to a subproblem involving and a single , and conver-

gence cannot be guaranteed in general. Nevertheless, in each it-

eration we recover Lagrange multipliers for a stationary point of

a related subproblem, therefore, intuitively, if this method con-

verges, it reaches a stationary point of the nonconvex program

.

We consider programs with nonconvex smooth functions

restricted to the affine domain

, and

Legendre-type function , whose conjugate function is

finite. Recall Theorem 2, describing Legendre-type function as

an essentially smooth function which is strictly convex in its in-

terior and satisfies

. For this type of nonconvex

programs we show in the following claim, that if Algorithm 8

converges, it reaches a local-minimum of

:

Claim 9: Consider Algorithm 8 with

for Legendre-

type function

and nonconvex continuously differentiable

functions

restricted to the affine domain

,

and assume in (22) is in the interior of

relative to the

affine set

. Then if the algorithm converges it reaches a

stationary point of the nonconvex program

.

Proof: The optimization

satisfies the conditions of the Lagrange multiplier Theorem 4

with respect to the affine set

, therefore if the algorithm

converges, there holds

From steps 2a and 2c, for every there must hold

. The conjugate of Legendre-type function satis-

fies

by Theorem 2, therefore for every holds

. This implies that the local primal ar-

guments

are the same for every , and we denote them by

. Summing up the relations in , we get

Substituting

(from step 2c), we obtain

the stationary condition for , i.e.,

.

2) Non-Strictly Convex Case: The case

in (7) corre-

sponds to having a nonstrictly convex function in (10). This

situation can be analyzed in greater generality by observing the

behavior of Algorithm 7 when the function is convex but not

strictly convex.

For convex and , the primal program in (19) upper

bounds the dual function in (20), and the dual block ascent op-

timization scheme which iteratively improves the dual function

must converge. If the function is not strictly convex its con-

jugate is not smooth and the dual block ascent is not guaranteed

to reach the global optimum. We describe, in a nutshell, where

things go wrong in the Algorithm 7. Assume the algorithm con-

verges, then for every , we obtain the primal solution

Recovering the dual variables corresponds to finding

. Recall that

, then

the primal-dual relation boils down to

for every . If was strictly convex it would have imply that

all the

are in fact the same and it would have ensure

optimality. Since

is not strictly convex it means that the

algorithm might converge in the dual domain but we cannot

recover a consistent .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

Fig. 7. Local subproblem of in step (b) of Algorithm 1 (min f (b) + b  + h (b)) solved by the norm-product algorithm.

Fig. 8. Reducing the local subproblem in Fig. 7 to a series of normalizations by introducing conditional entropies.

APPENDIX C NORM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

We embed the function definitions of and into the

primal-dual Algorithm 1. Given the sparse structure of then,

following Claim 1, we present the entries of according to the

factor-graph structure by setting

(and likewise

). We first define few short-cut notations

Note that the constraint

, i.e., that lives

in the probability simplex, is equivalent to the marginal con-

sistency constraint

as well. We can

use

to simplify the conditional entropy term

by the following Lemma:

Lemma 2:

(27)
Step (b) of Algorithm 1 is reduced to finding for all , described in (25) in Fig. 7:
We will derive the optimal and show it has a closed-form solution. In the process we will be relying on the following observation which we present as a Lemma, without a proof.
Lemma 1: Let be a nonnegative array and be the optimal probability array for the following optimization problem:

Proof: The Lemma is based on the definition of conditional entropy
for random variables , . In our terms, we have .
With the definitions above, the optimization problem of Step (b) as described in (25) can be broken down to a cascade of two steps, described in (25) in Fig. 8.
From Lemma 1 (29), we obtain the solution for the inner optimization block

We make the following definition: then

(28)

(30)

(29) Therefore, the inner-block denoted by takes the form:

We will be repeatedly using Lemma 1 in the derivation of ,

as follows. Let

and

be defined as follows:

Substituting

back into (26), we obtain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6313

and from Lemma 1 (28), we obtain a closed-form solution for Substituting (36) into (30), we obtain the update rule for

Finally,

(31)

(37)

Substituting (36) into (35), we obtain

takes the form

(32)

Next, we evaluate step (c) of Algorithm 1, i.e.,

and substituting in (31), we obtain the update rule for .

(33)
where is an arbitrary scalar and is defined in (10). Define as follows:

APPENDIX D CONVEX-FREE-ENERGY PARAMETER SETTINGS
The fractional entropy approximation of (3)

(34)

We note, therefore, that the additive constant freedom in the definition of becomes a scaling choice in the definition of
. Without loss of generality we choose the scale such that . The claim below sets the value of :

is strictly convex if it can be written as (4)

Proposition 2:

in terms of

,,

. In this section, we will in-

troduce a number entropy approximations which fall into the

(35) convex-free-energy class. We will start with the TRW entropy approximation [62] and then introduce other approximations.

Proof: From definition of

There are two ways, introduced in the literature so far, to set and from (33) we have: parameters for the TRW entropy approximation—both of which

do not belong the required setup of a convex-free-energy. In the

first version, the TRW-free-energy corresponds to the setting of

Substituting the value of

,

and

, where the setting

of corresponds to the relative number of spanning trees (or

hyper-trees) of the graph which include the edge (hyperedge) .

The problem with this setting is that

, thus, even though

and the value of

from (32), we obtain

the fractional entropy approximation is convex, the functions (defined in terms of and ) are not convex.

The second version, introduced by [17], sets as the relative

number of spanning trees that have node as a root, and for an

edge

, is the relative number of trees that include

the directed edge

. It is possible to find such edge prob-

abilities for the uniform distribution over all spanning trees by

employing a variant of the matrix tree theorem for directed trees,

[17], [59, p.141]. In this formulation ,

but

. The

problem with

is that the function is no longer strictly

and following substitution of we set out to prove.
Substituting (27), we obtain

, we obtain what into the definition of

convex.

In the claim below, we show how to convert a TRW setting

according to the second version, i.e., where ,

,

to the convex-free-energy setting

,,

:

Claim 10: Assume an approximated entropy

is described by

and

, i.e.,

and

.

Then there exists , ,

which agree on the ap-

(36) proximated entropy, namely

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

Proof: We describe an efficient algorithm for constructing

the desired convex free energy: initialize

,

,

. For every

and every

, consider the

entropy combination

and divide it to two cases.

1)

, then the entropy can be equivalently written

by the entropy

the Bethe free energy where

. The Bethe free energy is

nonconvex for factor graphs with cycles, thus is not a member

of the convex free energies, but empirical evidence suggest that

when BP converges the marginals are surprisingly good. For

Bethe free energy,

over all factor nodes —hence our

proposal to strive for uniformity over the space of admissible

solutions. In some sense we are attempting to “convexify” the

Bethe free energy, although this is not being done directly.

APPENDIX E INCORPORATING ZERO POTENTIALS

therefore perform:

(a)

;

(b)

.

2)

, then the entropy can be equivalently presented

as:

therefore perform:

(a)

;

(b)

.

Since , are positive we obtain an equivalent entropy ap-

proximation with

and ,

. A straightforward

bookkeeping ensures that and do not change.

Another concave approximation is to seek a setting of param-

eters

,,

such that the approximation is as

close as possible to the nonconvex Bethe approximation2. Given

the equations in Definition 1 connecting the parameters , ,

to and , the space of admissible solutions must satisfy

the following equations:

Among all possible admissible solutions, we choose the one in which is as uniform as possible, i.e., we apply Laplace’s principle of insufficient reasoning. The criterion function, therefore, minimizes:
(38)

A particularly important class of factors are those with zero

potentials. These type of potentials are used, for example, in

defining error-correcting codes. Note that if one or more of the

factor potentials

or local potentials

are equal to

zero, then the overall probability of states which contain these

configurations is zero, namely

or

re-

spectively. This restriction on the marginal probabilities implic-

itly appears in the variational programs using the convention

and

for

.

Recall that the variational approach seeks a distribution

which is as close as possible, in relative entropy

terms, to the product

. Expanding the

relative entropy produces the free energy

where

,

, and

,

are the

marginal probabilities, and

is the entropy function. Since

whenever

, the zero potential

constraints

if and only if

, Likewise,

constrains

whenever

. Fol-

lowing the above, the inference program which corresponds to

the free-energy minimization is well defined for zero potentials

when we consider the domain of the free energy, and takes the

form

. In spite the mathematical difficulty in-

troduced by using zero potentials, it makes no difference from

algorithmic perspective, since the optimal distribution is the

normalization of the product of potentials,

and it respects the domain constraint.

The same behavior appears in the variational approach for

MAP assignment, where one seeks vector which maximize

the energy

. This task is described by the

linear function

which is a least-squares criteria for uniformity of . We

refer to the two least-squares scheme as convex free-en-

ergy approximation. In an earlier work [19], we also used

the maximum entropy approach where the criterion function

minimizes

. Further investigation for constructing

good convex free-energy approximations can be found in [39].

The desire towards uniformity, besides being used exten-

sively in probabilistic settings, is motivated by the success of

whereas the zero potentials of the form

or

constraints

if and only if

or

respectively. Again, this mathematical nuance makes no differ-

ence from algorithmic perspective, since the optimal distribu-

tion is the a zero-one distribution, i.e.,

and for

every

holds

.

2A similar idea was independently derived by Nir Friedman and his collabo-

The framework of incorporating zero potentials in the domain

rators—personal communication.

of the optimized program also corresponds to the approximate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAZAN AND SHASHUA: NORM-PRODUCT BP: PRIMAL-DUAL MESSAGE-PASSING FOR APPROXIMATE INFERENCE

6315

inference and LP-relazation described by the minimization of the function

whose domain is constrained by zero potentials, namely

or

constraints

if and

only if

or

respectively. The domain

constrains are inherited by the norm-product algorithm where

we represent in the form

described in

(10) and (11). In particular,

only if

whenever

, and

only if

whenever

. This domain constraint does not affect

the norm-product algorithm whose optimal beliefs are a (power)

normalization of the potentials multiplied by the messages,

described in (31) and (32). Therefore, in the norm-product opti-

mization framework, zero potential

or

induces optimal beliefs satisfying

or

,

respectively.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank C. Yanover, T. Meltzer, O. Meshi, A. Jaimovich, A. Globerson, and Y. Weiss for helpful discussions. They also thank the anonymous referees for their criticisms and suggestions.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Baxter, Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Mechanics. New York: Academic, 1982.
[2] M. Bayati, D. Shah, and M. Sharma, “Maximum weight matching via max-product belief propagation,” in IProc. Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), 2005, pp. 1763–1767.
[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[4] D. P. Bertsekas, A. Nedic´, and A. E. Ozdaglar, Convex Analysis and Optimization. New York: Athena Scientific, 2003.
[5] L. Bregman, “The relaxation method of finding the common point of convex sets and its application to the solution of problems in convex programming,” U.S.S.R Comput. Math. and Math. Phys., vol. 7, pp. 200–217, 1967.
[6] L. Bregman, Y. Censor, and S. Reich, “Dykstra’s algorithm as the nonlinear extension of Bregman’s optimization method,” J. Convex Anal., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 319–333, 1999.
[7] Y. Censor and S. Reich, “The Dykstra algorithm with Bregman projections,” Commun. Appl. Anal., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 407–419, 1998.
[8] M. Chertkov and V. Chernyak, “Loop series for discrete statistical models on graphs,” J. Statist. Mech.: Theory and Exper., vol. 2006, pp. P06009–P06009, 2006.
[9] T. Cho, M. Butman, S. Avidan, and W. Freeman, “The patch transform and its applications to image editing,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2008, pp. 1–8.
[10] I. Csiszar, “I-divergence geometry of probability distributions and minimization problems,” Annals Probabil., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 146–158, 1975.
[11] R. Dykstra, “An iterative procedure for obtaining i-projections onto the intersection of convex sets,” Annals Probabil., vol. 13, pp. 975–984, 1985.
[12] R. Dykstra, “An algorithm for restricted least squares regression,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., vol. 78, pp. 837–842, 1983.
[13] J. Feldman, D. Karger, and M. Wainwright, “LP decoding,” in Proc. Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication Control and Computing, 2003, vol. 41, pp. 951–960.
[14] W. Freeman, E. Pasztor, and O. Carmichael, “Learning low-level vision,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 25–47, 2000.

[15] B. Frey, Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digital Communications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
[16] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[17] A. Globerson and T. Jaakkola, “Convergent propagation algorithms via oriented trees,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty in Artifical Intelligence (UAI), 2007.
[18] A. Globerson and T. Jaakkola, “Fixing max-product: Convergent message passing algorithms for MAP relaxations,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2007.
[19] T. Hazan and A. Shashua, “Convergent message-passing algorithms for inference over general graphs with convex free energies,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty in Artifical Intelligence (UAI), Helsinki, Finland, Jul. 2008.
[20] T. Heskes, “On the uniqueness of loopy belief propagation fixed points,” Neur. Comput., vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 2379–2413, 2004.
[21] T. Heskes, “On the uniqueness of Loopy belief propagation fixed points,” Neur. Comput., vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 2379–2413, 2004.
[22] T. Heskes, “Convexity arguments for efficient minimization of the Bethe and Kikuchi free energies,” J. Artific. Intell. Res., vol. 26, pp. 153–190, 2006.
[23] C. Hildreth, “A quadratic programming procedure,” Naval Res. Logist. Quart., 1957.
[24] B. Huang and T. Jebara, “Loopy belief propagation for bipartite maximum weight b-matching,” Artific. Intell. and Statist. (AISTATS), 2007.
[25] T. Jaakkola and M. Jordan, “Variational probabilistic inference and the QMR-DT database,” J. Artific. Intell. Res., 1999.
[26] J. Johnson, D. Malioutov, and A. Willsky, “Lagrangian relaxation for MAP estimation in graphical models,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Control, Communication and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2007.
[27] M. Jordan, Learning in Graphical Models. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
[28] R. Kalman, “A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems,” J. Basic Eng., vol. 82, pp. 34–45, 1960.
[29] R. Kikuchi, “A theory of cooperative phenomena,” Phys. Rev., vol. 81, no. 6, pp. 988–1003, 1951.
[30] V. Kolmogorov, “Convergent tree-reweighted message passing for energy minimization,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1568–1583, Oct. 2006.
[31] V. Kolmogorov and M. Wainwright, “On the optimality of tree-reweighted max-product message passing,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Edinburgh, Scotland, Jul. 2005.
[32] N. Komodakis and N. Paragios, “Beyond loose LP-relaxations: Optimizing MRFs by repairing cycles,” Eur. Conf. Computer Vision (ECCV 2008), pp. 806–820, 2008.
[33] N. Komodakis, N. Paragios, and G. Tziritas, “MRF energy minimization and beyond via dual decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., to be published.
[34] A. Koster, S. Hoesel, and A. Kolen, “The partial constraint satisfaction problem: Facets and lifting theorems,” Oper. Res. Lett., vol. 23, no. 3–5, pp. 89–97, 1998.
[35] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sumproduct algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[36] Z. Luo and P. Tseng, “On the convergence rate of dual ascent methods for linearly constrained convex minimization,” Math. Oper. Res., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 846–867, 1993.
[37] T. Meltzer, A. Globerson, and Y. Weiss, “Convergent message passing algorithms-a unifying view,” in In Uncertainty in Artific. Intell. (UAI), 2009.
[38] T. Meltzer, C. Yanover, and Y. Weiss, “Globally optimal solutions for energy minimization in stereo vision using reweighted belief propagation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Computer Vision, 2005.
[39] O. Meshi, A. Jaimovich, A. Globerson, and N. Friedman, “Convexifying the Bethe free energy,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty in Artifical Intelligence (UAI), 2009.
[40] J. Mooij, libDAI: A Free/Open Source C++ library for Discrete Approximate Inference Methods 2009 [Online]. Available: http://www. libdai.org
[41] J. Mooij and H. Kappen, “Sufficient conditions for convergence of loopy belief propagation,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty in Artifical Intelligence (UAI), 2005.
[42] Y. Nesterov, Introductory Lectures on Convex Optimization: A Basic Course. Heidelberg, The Netherlands: Springer, 2004.
[43] J. V. Neumann, Functional Operators Vol. II. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1950.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2010

[44] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. New York: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[45] P. Ravikumar, A. Agarwal, and M. Wainwright, “Message-passing for graph-structured linear programs: Proximal projections, convergence and rounding schemes,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Machine Learning, New York, 2008, pp. 800–807.
[46] R. Rockafellar, Convex Analysis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1970.
[47] S. Sanghavi, D. Malioutov, and A. Willsky, “Linear programming analysis of loopy belief propagation for weighted matching,” in Proc. Neur. Inform. Process. Syst., 2007.
[48] M. Schlesinger, “Syntactic analysis of two-dimensional visual signals in noisy conditions,” Kibernetika, vol. 4, pp. 113–130, 1976.
[49] N. Shental, A. Zomet, T. Hertz, and Y. Weiss, “Learning and inferring image segmentations using the GBP typical cut algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Computer Vision (ICCV), 2003.
[50] S. Shimony, “Finding MAPs for belief networks is NP-hard,” Artific. Intell., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 399–410, 1994.
[51] D. Sontag and T. Jaakkola, “New outer bounds on the marginal polytope,” Adv. Neur. Inform. Process. Syst., pp. 1393–1400, 2008.
[52] D. Sontag and T. Jaakkola, “Tree block coordinate descent for MAP in graphical models,” in Proc. 12th Int. Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AI-STATS), Clearwater Beach, FL, 2009.
[53] D. Sontag, T. Meltzer, A. Globerson, T. Jaakkola, and Y. Weiss, “Tightening lp relaxations for map using message passing,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), Helsinki, Finland, 2008.
[54] E. Sudderth, M. Wainwright, and A. Willsky, “Loop series and Bethe variational bounds in attractive graphical models,” Adv. Neur. Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 20, pp. 1425–1432, 2008.
[55] M. Tappen and W. Freeman, “Comparison of graph cuts with belief propagation for stereo, using identical MRF parameters,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision, 2003, vol. 2, pp. 900–906.
[56] S. Tatikonda and M. Jordan, “Loopy belief propagation and Gibbs measures,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 2002.
[57] P. Tseng, “Dual coordinate ascent methods for non-strictly convex minimization,” Mathemat. Programm., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 231–247, 1993.
[58] P. Tseng and S. Yun, “A coordinate gradient descent method for nonsmooth separable minimization,” Mathemat. Programm., vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 387–423, 2009.
[59] W. Tutte, Graph Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001.
[60] A. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 2, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.
[61] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” Arxiv preprint cs/0602088, 2006.
[62] M. J. Wainwright, T. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “Tree-based reparameterization for approximate estimation on graphs with cycles,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Dec. 2002.

[63] M. Wainwright, T. Jaakkola, and A. Willsky, “A new class of upper bounds on the log partition function,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2313–2335, Jul. 2005.
[64] M. Wainwright, T. Jaakkola, and A. Willsky, “MAP estimation via agreement on trees: Message-passing and linear programming,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3697–3717, Nov. 2005.
[65] Y. Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neur. Comput., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–41, 2000.
[66] Y. Weiss, C. Yanover, and T. Meltzer, “Map estimation, linear programming and belief propagation with convex free energies,” in Proc. 19th Conf. Uncertainty in Artifical Inteligence (UAI), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2007.
[67] T. Werner, “A linear programming approach to max-sum problem: A review,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 1165–1179, Jul. 2007.
[68] C. Yanover, T. Meltzer, and Y. Weiss, “Linear programming relaxations and belief propagation-an empirical study,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 7, pp. 1907–1907, 2006.
[69] C. Yanover and Y. Weiss, “Approximate inference and protein-folding,” in Proc. Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2003, pp. 1481–1488.
[70] J. Yedidia, W. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, Jul. 2005.
[71] A. Yuille, “CCCP algorithms to minimize the Bethe and Kikuchi free energies: Convergent alternatives to belief propagation,” Neur. Comput., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1691–1722, 2002.
Tamir Hazan received his degree from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
He is a Research Assistant Professor at TTI Chicago. His research interests include learning and inference in graphical models, distributed algorithms, factorizations, kernel methods, and machine learning.
Amnon Shashua received the Ph.D. degree from the AI Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, in 1993, working on computational vision where he pioneered work on multiple view geometry and the recognition of objects under variable lighting.
He holds the Sachs chair in computer science at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. He founded startup companies in computer vision and his latest brainchild, Mobileye, developing systems-on-chip and computer vision algorithms for detecting pedestrians, vehicles, and traffic signs for driving assistance systems.
Prof. Shashua received the Landau award in exact sciences in 2005 for his work on multiple-view geometry. For his industrial contributions, he blahreceived the 2004 Kaye Innovation award from the Hebrew University.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

