IEEE Globecom 2010 Workshop on Complex and Communication Networks

Analysis of Performance and Implementation Complexity of Simplified Algorithms for Decoding Low-Density Parity-Check codes

Vikram Arkalgud Chandrasetty and Syed Mahfuzul Aziz
School of Electrical and Information Engineering University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes Campus, SA 5095, Australia
vikramac@ieee.org, mahfuz.aziz@unisa.edu.au

Abstract—This paper presents a novel technique to significantly reduce the implementation complexity of Low-Density ParityCheck (LDPC) decoders. The proposed technique uses high precision soft messages at the variable nodes but scales down the extrinsic message length, which reduces the number of interconnections between variable and check nodes. It also simplifies the check node operation. The effect on performance and complexity of the decoders due to such simplification is analyzed. A prototype model of the proposed decoders compliant with the WiMax application standard has been implemented and tested on Xilinx Virtex 5 FPGA. The implementation results show that the proposed decoders can achieve significant reduction in hardware complexity with comparable decoding performance to that of Min-Sum algorithm based decoders. The proposed decoders are estimated to achieve an average throughput in the range of 6 – 11 Gbps, even with short code lengths.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, first introduced in 1962 [1], have become extremely popular in the recent years [2]. The near Shannon Limit performance [3] and high degree of parallelizable structure [4] of the code makes it most suitable for implementation in high data rate applications such as WLAN, WiMax, DVB-S2 and optical communication [5]. Hence, analyzing the performance and complexity of LDPC decoders is of paramount interest to communication engineers and researchers [6]. The performance of a LDPC decoder predominantly depends on the complexity of the underlying algorithm. High complexity algorithms, such as sum-product, can achieve excellent biterror rate (BER) performance [7] but require massive hardware resources for implementation [8]. Achieving a balanced trade-off between the decoding performance (BER and average iterations/throughput) and implementation complexity (hardware resources) of the LDPC decoders is a critical factor for any practical application.
A fully-parallel architecture of a LDPC decoder requires all the decoding nodes and their inter-connections to be realized in hardware, and can achieve throughputs in the range of several Giga bits per second (Gbps) [9, 10]. For large code lengths, fully-parallel architecture requires massive hardware resources and has highly complex interconnects leading to hardware routing congestions. Hence, semi-parallel architectures are used to ease these issues by breaking down the large decoder structure. However, a semiparallel decoder has significantly reduced throughput due to additional clock cycles required for decoding, and can only achieve throughputs in the range of Mega bits per second

(Mbps) [11, 12]. For applications such as Ethernet 802.3an) [13] and Optical communication [14], the throughput requirement ranges from 10-100 Gbps. An LDPC decoder with such performance is currently achievable only with an ASIC implementation of a fully-parallel architecture [15]. FPGA implementation of such high performance decoders is still a potential problem. In [8], a simplified sum-product algorithm is proposed to reduce the complexity of the check node operation. But the reduction in complexity achievable by using logarithmic functions at the check nodes is insignificant. Decoders based on stochastic [10] and binary message passing algorithms [16-18] incorporate techniques that serialize the messages between the processing nodes to significantly reduce the number of node inter-connections and also simplify the check node operations. Similarly, in the bitserial architecture proposed in [19], the extrinsic messages are serialized between the decoding nodes to reduce the inter-connect complexity of fully-parallel architectures. However, these techniques introduce additional hardware overhead (e.g. FIFO) in each of the decoding nodes and reduce the throughput substantially. Modifications have also been proposed at the algorithmic [20, 21] and architectural [22, 23] levels to reduce the implementation complexity of the decoders, especially on FPGAs. However, investigation on algorithms that significantly reduce the number of node inter-connects and implementation complexity, yet delivering acceptable decoding performance is limited in the literature.
This paper presents algorithms that have reduced interconnect complexity and simplified check node operations. The algorithms introduce slight increase in complexity of variable node operation. However, the overall performance of the LDPC decoder is comparable to that of Min-Sum algorithm and also leading to a massive reduction in hardware resources. Considering Min-Sum [24] as a benchmark, the proposed algorithms, namely Modified Min-Sum (MMS) and Simplified Message Passing (SMP), are compared for their performance and complexity. The MMS and SMP algorithms incorporate hybrid techniques of scaling down the extrinsic message lengths to 2-bit and 1-bit respectively, while using 4bit intrinsic messages at the variable nodes. The proposed algorithms are independent of the hardware architecture. However, in this paper, fully-parallel architecture has been designed for preliminary analysis and validation of the algorithms. Prototypes of the proposed LDPC decoders suitable for the WiMax application standard have been implemented and tested on Xilinx Virtex 5 FPGA. Results show that the MMS and SMP algorithms can achieve

978-1A-4ut2ho4ri4ze-d8l8ic6en5s-e0d /u1se0l/im$i2te6d.t0o:0Yo©ns2e0i U1n0iv.IEDoEwEnloaded on J4u3n0e 24,2026 at 03:29:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

significantly higher throughput, massive reduction in hardware resources and comparable BER performance to that of 4-bit realization of the Min-Sum algorithm (MS4).
II. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHMS
The Min-Sum algorithm (MSA) is a modified version of the Sum-Product algorithm [24]. The non-linear operation in the check node of SPA has been reduced to a simple comparison operation in MSA. This simplification leads to slight degradation in BER performance [24]. The quantization length of soft-input messages, also known as log-likelihood ratio (LLR), plays an important role in the BER performance of the decoder. Studies have shown that using 4-bit quantization provides optimum performance [25]. Hence, 4-bit realization of the Min-Sum algorithm (MS4) is chosen in this paper to compare the performance and complexity of the algorithms proposed in this paper.
The extrinsic message length critically impacts upon the hardware inter-connect complexity of a LDPC decoder [26]. This is one of the major issues in implementation of fullyparallel architectures [19]. For both the algorithms proposed in this paper, the interconnect complexity is reduced significantly by reducing the extrinsic message lengths between the variable and check nodes while maintaining full intrinsic message length at the variable node. In addition the check node operation is further simplified to reduce complexity and enhance speed. . The proposed MMS algorithm uses 2-bit extrinsic message and the SMP algorithm uses 1-bit extrinsic messages, while retaining the intrinsic message (LLR) length to 4 bits at the variable node. The variable node and check node are modified accordingly
.
A. Min-Sum algorithm
In the Min-Sum algorithm, the quantized intrinsic message (i.e., the LLRs) and the extrinsic messages (between variable and check nodes) are of equal length. Hence the hardware implementation complexity, especially the interconnect network [19] between the decoding nodes increases drastically as the message length increases, especially for large code lengths [25]. The variable node (V) and check node (C) operations in the Min-Sum algorithm are as shown in (1) and (2) respectively.

∑ Variable node:Vi = LLRn + Cj

(1)

j≠i

where, n = 1, 2,….N (variable nodes) i , j = 1, 2,….dv (degree of variable node ‘n’)

∏ Check node: Ck

=

l≠k

sign(Vl

)

×

min l≠k

Vl

(2)

where, l, k = 1,2,….dc (degree of check node)

B. Proposed Modified Min-Sum algorithm
The Modified Min-Sum (MMS) algorithm uses 2-bit extrinsic messages between the variable and check nodes [27, 28], but requires 4-bit intrinsic message for variable node operation [29, 30]. This technique not only reduces the interconnect complexity but also simplifies the check node to perform 2-bit operations. However, the variable node is required to map 2-bit messages to 4 bits and vice versa. The node operations of the MMS algorithm are presented below.

a) Variable ode operation
The variable node operation is similar to that of the MinSum algorithm [24]. The difference in the proposed algorithm is that the variable node (Vi) performs higher precision quantized LLR operations (LLRn), but maps the computed result to a 2-bit message to pass it to the check nodes, as in (3). The 2-bit message consists of a sign bit and a magnitude bit representing the computed LLR sum. The 4-bit to 2-bit message mapping is based on a threshold (Tm). Depending on the message received from the check nodes (Cj), the 2-bit message is again mapped to 4-bit constant values (±W or ±w) to perform the LLR sum operation in the variable node. The functions for mapping the 2-bit and 4-bit messages are shown in (4) and (5).

∑ Vi = g LLRn + j≠i f (Cj)

(3)

where, n = 1, 2,….N (variable nodes) i, j = 1, 2,….dv (degree of variable node ‘n’)

01 if , y > Tm

g

(

y)

=

00 

10

if , if ,

0 ≤ y ≤ Tm 0 > x ≥ −Tm

(4)

11 if x < −Tm

+ W if , x = 01

f

(x)

=

 +

 

−

w w

if , if ,

x = 00 x = 10

(5)

− W if , x = 11

where, Tm is the optimized threshold for mapping obtained from simulations; W is the optimized higher integer constant obtained from simulations; w is the optimized lower integer constant obtained from simulations. Monte Carlo simulations were carried out to obtain Tm (2), W (±3) and w (±1) values that leads to the best possible BER performance of the algorithm, using 4-bit LLR quantization.

b) Check ode operation
In the Min-Sum algorithm, the check node is expected to determine the product of the sign bits of incoming messages and also find the minimum magnitude among the incoming messages [24]. Similarly in the proposed MMS, the product of the sign bits of incoming messages is computed using XOR

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3n1e 24,2026 at 03:29:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

operation (Sk) and the minimum is determined using AND operation (Mk). The check node output message (Ck) is obtained simply by concatenating the resultant sign bit and the magnitude bit, as in (8). The message passing between the nodes continues till the parity check is satisfied or maximum iteration is reached.

Sk

=

V (s) 1

⊕ V2(s)

⊕

..... ⊕ Vl(s)

∀l ≠ k (6)

Mk

=

V (m) 1

&

V (m) 2

& .....

& Vl(m)

∀l ≠ k

(7)

Ck = {Sk M k }

(8)

where, l, k = 1,2,….dc (degree of check node) S = Sign bit of check node message M = Magnitude bit of check node message Vl(s)= Sign bit of the message ‘l’ from variable node Vl(m)=Magnitude bit of the message ‘l’ from variable
node
The MMS algorithm results in a slight increase in the complexity of the variable node compared to the traditional Min-Sum algorithm due to the mapping operations required. However, the impact of this complexity is greatly compensated by the simplified check node operation and reduced inter-connects. As will be seen later in the results, the complexity of the variable node becomes insignificant when compared to the advantages gained in improved overall performance and reduced complexity of the decoder as a whole.

C. Proposed Simplified Message Passing algorithm
The reduction in complexity of LDPC decoding algorithms is further explored by considering a Simplified Message Passing (SMP) algorithm [31]. The SMP uses 1-bit extrinsic messages and 4-bit intrinsic messages for the variable node operation. Therefore this simplifies the check nodes to perform 1-bit operations and significantly reduces the inter-connect complexity. The node operations of the SMP algorithm are presented below.

a) Check- ode operation
Since the SMP algorithm requires 1-bit extrinsic messages between the decoding nodes, a simple parity check operation is optimal for the check node. The parity check operation is performed using XOR logic as shown in (9).

Ck = V 1 ⊕ V 2 ⊕ ..... ⊕ Vl ∀l ≠ k

(9)

where, l, k = 1,2,….degree of check node
The stochastic [10] and binary message-passing [16-18] based LDPC decoders also incorporate a similar check node operation with XOR logic. However, these decoding techniques exchange serialized messages between the nodes, which requires additional hardware (e.g. FIFO) to serialize messages and also slows down the decoder. In comparison,

the proposed SMP uses single-bit messages, where serialization is not required.

b) Variable- ode operation
The variable node (V) performs ‘sum’ operation similar to the Min-Sum algorithm, but the difference is that SMP requires original LLR value only at the beginning of the decoding cycle, as in (10). The updated new LLR value is used in subsequent iterations, as in (13). In the analysis of hard-decision based channels presented in [32] the variable node operates directly on the hard-decision bit received from the check nodes. In contrast, the proposed SMP maps the bit suggestion from the check nodes (C) to an optimized integer constant called ‘Weight’ (±W), which is determined from simulations to achieve the best possible BER performance. It is either added to or subtracted from the current LLR value. For example, if binary ‘0’ is received from the check node it is mapped to +W, and if binary ‘1’ is received it is mapped to –W, as in (11) and (12) respectively. After this operation, a hard-decision is performed on the updated LLR value and it is sent across to the respective check nodes for parity check, as in (14). The process is repeated until the parity check is satisfied or the maximum iteration is reached.

Initial (at iteration 0): Vn = LLR

(10)

Subsequent iterations:

Xi = +W , If Ci = 0

(11)

Xi = −W , If Ci = 1

(12)

∑ Vn = Vn + Xi

(13)

Vi = sign(Vn − Xi)

(14)

[‘+’ → ‘0’ and ‘-‘→’1’] where, n = 1,2,….number of variable nodes
i = 1,2,….degree of variable node W = ±1, optimized integer constant obtained from Monte Carlo simulations for optimum BER performance.

III. SIMULATIONS AND IMPLEMENTATION
The proposed LDPC decoding algorithms were first simulated using software models to assess their decoding performance. Hardware models were then developed and implemented on FPGA. The implementation complexity and decoding performance of the proposed decoders are then compared against those of original Min-Sum based decoders. A detailed description of the above activities is as follows:
A. Simulation Setup
Software models of the proposed algorithms (MMS and SMP) and 4-bit realization of the Min-Sum algorithm (MS4) have been developed in the MatLab environment using the C programming language. LDPC codes were generated using Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm [33]. Simulations were carried out assuming that the code words were modulated using Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) [34] and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3n2e 24,2026 at 03:29:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

passed over an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel [34].
Simulations were performed on a common environment for all the algorithms using ½ rate (3, 6) regular 576-bit LDPC code that is compliant with WiMax application [35]. Each data point in the BER performance curve corresponds to at least 1000 bits in error. 4-bit LLR quantization (inclusive of the sign bit) was used for the simulation of all the decoders. The maximum number of allowable decoding iteration was set to 10. The simulation results will be presented in Section IV together with the FPGA implementation results.
B. Hardware Modelling and Implementation
A fully-parallel LDPC decoder architecture has been designed for preliminary prototyping and assessment of the implementation complexity and performance of the proposed algorithms (MMS and SMP) and MS4. The parameterized hardware model was developed using Verilog Hardware Description Language (HDL) and synthesized using Xilinx synthesis tool. The behavioral and post synthesis simulations were carried out using ModelSim.
Since, a LDPC decoder has numerous inter-connects between the decoding nodes, hand coding such complex structure is a tedious process [36]. Hence an automation tool was developed to generate the inter-connect module in Verilog HDL, based on the position of non-zero elements in the LDPC matrix. The tool has been developed using the C programming language and executed in the MatLab environment. The tool provides the flexibility to generate variable inter-connect bitwidths (extrinsic message length), as specified by the user. This feature is needed since the proposed algorithms (MMS and SMP) require analysis of variable extrinsic message lengths (2-bit and 1-bit respectively). The variable node and check node modules were hand coded according to the algorithm. An illustration of the automation tool is shown in Fig. 1. This automation tool has made the design process highly reliable and effortless for making complex interconnections accurately and instantly. It also leads to significant saving in design time of the LDPC decoder, for quick prototyping of various algorithms and different LDPC code lengths.

RS232 port of a PC. MatLab was used to communicate with the FPGA using the serial port. LLRs were generated and sent to the FPGA with appropriate control signals for decoding. The decoded data received via the same serial port was used to analyze the performance of the decoder.
IV. ANALYSIS OF PERFORMANCE AND COMPLEXITY
A. Decoding performance
The decoding performance of the proposed LDPC decoders implemented on FPGA are assessed by analysing the bit error rate (BER) and average iterations, as shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 respectively. The performance plots show the software simulation results for MS4, MMS and SMP. Whereas, the performance results from FPGA were obtained for the proposed algorithms (MMS and SMP) only. Compared to MS4, the MMS and SMP decoders suffer degradation in performance of at-least ~0.5 dB and ~2.5 dB respectively at a BER of 10-5 (see Fig. 2). The average iterations required for decoding is lower for MS4 compared to the proposed decoders (see Fig. 3). This behaviour is due to the simplification of the check node operations and reduction in the extrinsic message lengths in MMS and SMP. It is also noted that the performance loss (BER and average iterations) in FPGA implementation to that of software simulation for MMS is slightly higher compared to SMP. This difference is due to the approximations done while constructing look-up table (LUT) for message mapping in MMS (see Eq. 4 and Eq. 5). However, the mapping for SMP is relatively simpler (see Eq. 11 and Eq. 12). Despite the degradation in performance of the proposed decoders compared to Min-Sum they offer significant advantage in implementation complexity and achievable throughputs as discussed in the next section.

Fig. 1. Illustration of automation technique used to design LDPC decoder
C. Test Procedure A RS232 transceiver module was embedded on the FPGA
along with the LDPC decoder module to interface with the

Fig. 2. Comparison of BER performance of MS4, MMS and SMP decoders

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3n3e 24,2026 at 03:29:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where fmax is the maximum operating frequency obtained from synthesis, it is the number of decoding iterations and θ is the number of clock cycles required to complete one iteration (θ = 1, for fully-parallel architecture implementation).
The estimated average throughput of MS4 (simulation), MMS and SMP over a range of signal to noise ratio (Eb/No)) is shown in Fig. 4. For a BER performance of 10-5 at Eb/No = 4.25 dB (see Fig. 2), the MMS decoder can achieve an average throughput of 6 Gbps. However, the SMP requires higher SNR (Eb/No ≈ 6.25 dB) to achieve a similar BER performance and a massive average throughput of 11 Gbps.

Fig. 3. Comparison of average decoding iterations of MS4, MMS and SMP decoders

B. Implementation complexity
The implementation complexities of the proposed LDPC decoders are analysed by examining the hardware resource utilization and routing complexity. A summary of FPGA device utilization generated by the Xilinx Synthesis Tool after the post-placement and routing (PAR) stage is shown in Table I. From the table, it is clear that the implementation complexities of the proposed algorithms are drastically reduced by using shorter extrinsic message lengths. Significant savings of at-least 60% and 76% of FPGA slices is achieved for MMS and SMP respectively compared to MS4. A massive improvement in operating clock frequency is also observed.
The routing complexities of the proposed algorithms are assessed by calculating the number of node inter-connects (Ic) in the decoders using the formula shown in (15).

Ic = 2 × Cl × El ×Vd

(15)

where, Cl is the code length, El is the extrinsic message length and Vd is the degree of the variable node. The calculation includes the inter-connections from the variable node to the check node and vice versa, by introducing a multiplying factor of 2 in (15). Table I shows that the number of interconnects for MMS and SMP are significantly lower than MS4.

The throughput (T) of the decoders are computed using the formula shown in (16) [9]. This calculation excludes the serial load time of individual LLRs (before starting the decoding process) and latch time of decoded output data (after decoding is complete).

Fig. 4. Comparison of average throughput of MS4, MMS and SMP decoders

TABLE I SUMMARY OF FPGA IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

Device LDPC code Intrinsic message Extrinsic message No. of inter-connects
Slices LUTs Registers Clock Max. Iterations Avg. Iterations at BER of 10-5 Eb/No at BER of 10-5 Avg. Throughput at a BER of 10-5

MS4

MMS

SMP

Xilinx Virtex 5 (XC5VLX110T)

½ rate (3, 6) 576-bit (WiMax)

4-bit (LLR)

4-bit

2-bit

1-bit

13824

6912

3456

16762 (97%) 6803 (39%) 4095 (23%)

55872 (80%) 19585(28%) 12673(18%)

11076 (16%) 7619 (11%) 5315 (7%)

60 MHz

138 MHz

142 MHz

10

5.6

6.6

3.6

3.7 dB

4.25 dB

6.2 dB

~3 Gbps

~6 Gbps

~11 Gbps

T

=

rate × codelength × ×θ

f max

(16)

it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3n4e 24,2026 at 03:29:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, two reduced complexity LDPC decoding algorithms have been proposed. Unique techniques have been incorporated to reduce the inter-connect complexity and to simplify the check node operations. The performance and complexity of the decoders have been analyzed by software simulations and hardware implementations. Using higher precision intrinsic messages and lower precision extrinsic messages significantly reduced the hardware resource requirements of the decoders. The practical performances of 576-bit decoders, suitable for WiMax applications, have been verified by implementing and testing on FPGA. Due to the reduced complexity of the decoders, a massive throughput in the range of 6~11 Gbps is achievable. The massive throughput and hardware savings are accompanied by degradation in BER performance. However this BER degradation is small in case of the MMS decoder, being ~0.5 dB. Although the proposed decoders were implemented using a fully-parallel architecture, the algorithms are highly attractive for partially parallel architectures, thereby allowing the implementation of large LDPC codes using modest amount of hardware resources,.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes", IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices", IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, 1999.
[3] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes", Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457-458, 1997.
[4] G.L.L. Nicolas Fau, LDPC (Low Density Parity Check) - A Better Coding Scheme for Wireless PHY Layers Design and Reuse Industry Article, 2008.
[5] Tetsuo Nozawa, LDPC Adopted for Use in Comms, Broadcasting, HDDs, Nikkei Electronics Asia, 2005.
[6] Z. Khan, et al., "Performance analysis of IEEE defined LDPC codes under various decoding algorithms and their implementation on a reconfigurable instruction cell architecture", in IEEE International SOC Conference, 2007. Hsin Chu, Taiwan.
[7] J.H. Han and M.H. Sunwoo, "Simplified sum-product algorithm using piecewise linear function approximation for low complexity LDPC decoding", in 3rd International Conference on Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication, 2009. Suwon, Korea: ACM.
[8] S. Papaharalabos and P.T. Mathiopoulos, "Simplified sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes with optimal performance", Electronics Letters, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 116-117, 2009.
[9] R. Zarubica, S.G. Wilson, and E. Hall, "Multi-Gbps FPGA-Based Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Decoder Design", in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2007. Washington, DC.
[10] S. Sharifi Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W.J. Gross, "Fully Parallel Stochastic LDPC Decoders", IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5692-5703, 2008.
[11] M. Karkooti and J.R. Cavallaro, "Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding", in International Conference on Information Technology: Coding and Computing, 2004.
[12] K. Shimizu, et al., "Partially-parallel LDPC decoder based on highefficiency message-passing algorithm", in IEEE International Conference on Computer Design: VLSI in Computers and Processors, 2005.
[13] IAGARA Flow - High Performance LDPC decoder for 10 Gbps Ethernet. 2009 [cited 2009 Nov]; Available from: www.widesail.com
[14] FRAZER flow - LDPC decoder for 100 Gbps Optical Comms 2009 [cited 2009 Nov]; Available from: www.widesail.com

[15] V.A. Zhengya Zhang, Martin J. Wainwright, Borivoje Nikolić, "A 47

Gb/s LDPC Decoder with Improved Low Error Rate Performance", in

Symposium on VLSI Circuits, 2009. Kyoto, Japan.

[16] C. Chao-Yu, et al., "A binary message-passing decoding algorithm for

LDPC codes", in 47th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication,

Control, and Computing 2009. Monticello, IL.

[17] N. Mobini, A.H. Banihashemi, and S. Hemati, "A Differential Binary

Message-Passing LDPC Decoder", in IEEE Global

Telecommunications Conference, 2007. Washington, DC.

[18] H. Qin, et al., "Two reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding

algorithms for LDPC codes", IEEE Transactions on Communications,

vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 3597-3606, 2009.

[19] A. Darabiha, A.C. Carusone, and F.R. Kschischang, "A bit-serial

approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation", in

IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, 2006. Island

of Kos, Greece.

[20] S. Papaharalabos, et al., "Modified sum-product algorithms for

decoding low-density parity-check codes", IET Communications, vol. 1,

no. 3, pp. 294-300, 2007.

[21] Z. Zhou, et al., "Modified min-sum decoding algorithm for LDPC

codes based on classified correction", in 3rd International Conference

on Communications and etworking 2008. Hangzhou.

[22] S.S. Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W.J. Gross, "An Area-Efficient FPGA-

Based Architecture for Fully-Parallel Stochastic LDPC Decoding", in

IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, 2007. Shanghai, China.

[23] C. Zhiqiang, W. Zhongfeng, and L. Youjian, "High-Throughput

Layered LDPC Decoding Architecture", IEEE Transactions on Very

Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 582-587,

2009.

[24] A. Anastasopoulos, "A comparison between the sum-product and the

min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution", in

IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001. San Antonio, TX.

[25] R. Zarubica, et al., "Efficient quantization schemes for LDPC

decoders", in IEEE Military Communications Conference, 2008. San

Diego, CA.

[26] A. El-Maleh, B. Arkasosy, and M. Al-Andalusi, "Interconnect-efficient

LDPC code design", in 18th IEEE International Conference on

Microlelectronics, 2006. Dhahran.

[27] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, "Improved low-complexity low-density parity-

check decoding", IET Communications, vol. 2, no. 8, pp. 1061-1068,

2008.

[28] S.K. Chilappagari, et al., "Two-bit message passing decoders for LDPC

codes over the binary symmetric channel", in IEEE International

Symposium on Information Theory, 2009.

[29] V.A. Chandrasetty and S.M. Aziz, "FPGA Implementation of High

Performance LDPC Decoder Using Modified 2-Bit Min-Sum

Algorithm", in 2nd International Conference on Computer Research

and Development, 2010. Kuala Lumpur.

[30] Z. Xiaojun, et al., "Uniform All-Integer Quantization for Irregular

LDPC Decoder", in 5th International Conference on Wireless

Communications, etworking and Mobile Computing, 2009.

[31] V.A. Chandrasetty and S.M. Aziz, "A reduced complexity message

passing algorithm with improved performance for LDPC decoding", in

12th International Conference on Computers and Information

Technology, 2009. Dhaka.

[32] G. Lechner, T. Pedersen, and G. Kramer, "EXIT Chart Analysis of

Binary Message-Passing Decoders", in IEEE International Symposium

on Information Theory, 2007. Nice.

[33] X.Y. Hu. Software to Construct PEG LDPC code. 2008 May 2009];

Available

from:

http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/PEG_ECC.html.

[34] J.G. Proakis, Digital communications. 5th ed, ed. M. Salehi, New York,

McGraw-Hill, 2008.

[35] IEEE Standard, WiMax (IEEE 802.16e) - Mobile. 2006. p. 629.

[36] S.M. Aziz and M.D. Pham, "Implementation of Low Density Parity

Check Decoders using a New High Level Design Methodology",

Journal of Computers, Academy Publisher, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 81-90,

2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3n5e 24,2026 at 03:29:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

