1524

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2019

Multi-Stage Bit-Flipping Decoding Algorithms for LDPC Codes
Tofar C.-Y. Chang , Member, IEEE, Pin-Han Wang , and Yu T. Su , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— We present two general multi-stage (MS) bitflipping (BF) decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Both algorithms consist of soft-decision (SD) and hard-decision BF decoding parts. In comparison with known MS LDPC decoders, our approach is much simpler as all stages share the same BF structure. The only complexity increase is due to the use of an adaptive stage-switching (SS) mechanism which gives near-optimal SS timing. A new design issue we address is that the first-stage algorithm’s parameter has to be re-tuned to achieve the optimal overall performance. The numerical results demonstrate that the proposed decoding methods can significantly improve the error-rate performance of the conventional SD BF decoders.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, bit-flipping decoding, loop detection.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE bit-flipping (BF) algorithm, originally introduced by Gallager, is a low-complexity method for decoding lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]. The performance of the BF algorithm, however, is much inferior to that of the sumproduct algorithm, which is also known as the belief propagation (BP) algorithm. To reduce the performance gap, many variants which use soft-decision (SD) information to improve the reliability estimate of the bit decisions, e.g., the gradient descent BF (GDBF) algorithm [2] and the family of weighted BF (WBF) algorithms [3]–[6], have been introduced. The improvements brought about by these variations, however, are rather limited. So, one is tempted to ask if there is any lowcomplexity approach to further improve these SD BF methods.
This question leads us to review proposals that combine two or more existing LDPC decoding algorithms by activating them sequentially [7]–[10] to improve the error-rate or convergence rate performance. Jiang et al. [7] proposed a two-stage decoder in which a conventional BP algorithm is used in the first stage and, after I iterations, an ordered-statistic decoder (OSD) takes over the decoding task if a valid codeword is not found. Unlike previous BP-OSD decoders, the OSD in [7] uses a weighted accumulated log-likelihood ratio (LLR) metric that involves past I LLR. The optimal weighting (damping)
Manuscript received May 13, 2019; accepted June 10, 2019. Date of publication June 20, 2019; date of current version September 10, 2019. This work was supported in part by Taiwan’s Ministry of Science and Technology under Grant MOST 107-2221-E-009-129-. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was C. Feng. (Corresponding author: Yu T. Su.)
T. C.-Y. Chang and Y. T. Su are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan (e-mail: ytsu@mail.nctu.edu.tw).
P.-H. Wang is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2924210

factor depends on I and the code used and has to be found by simulations. Li and Zhang [8] suggested a two-stage approach that uses a so-called fast WBF algorithm for the first I iterations, followed by a conventional BP decoder. Zeidan and Elsabrouty [9] presented another two-stage decoder using the BP algorithm for the first stage and an SD BF algorithm in the second stage. In [10], Li el at. used an SD BF algorithm to start decoding and when this SD BF decoder fails after a fixed number of iterations, a sophisticated OSD takes over using the accumulated bit reliability and the associated syndrome.
Sequential multi-stage (MS) decoding seems to be a simple and straightforward idea to enhance decoder performance. But there also arise the problems of implementation complexity and the timing of stage-switching (SS), which, unfortunately, are seldom addressed in the MS literature. For the latter issue, the above-mentioned approaches all set a fixed iteration number threshold for the first-stage algorithm and switch to the second stage when the iteration counter reaches this threshold. The predetermined threshold can only be found by simulations and is a function of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR, Eb/N0) and the code and the decoding algorithm used. The implementation complexity (including storage) has to do with the algorithms used and, as evidenced by the above description, these known MS approaches need substantial complexity increases when compared with their single-stage counterparts.
To solve the SS problem, we first observe that an SD BF decoding algorithm is likely to exhibit an oscillatory bit decision pattern after a certain number of iterations [12], i.e., an illegitimate decoded vector reappears periodically, and the decoding process is trapped in an infinite loop that eventually leads to a decoding failure. Thus a reasonable SS time is when such a loop is detected and so the MS decoder is to be accompanied by a proper loop detector. Loop detection has been used by some SD BF decoders to escape from the loop by inserting a perturbation iteration once a loop is detected [12]. In the perturbation iteration, the BF rule is changed and the decoder returns to the original BF rule afterward. We will explain in Section III-A that re-activating the previous SD algorithm or other SD BF rules runs the risk of falling into another loop. Thus we take a different approach: having the Gallager’s hard-decision (HD) BF algorithm takes over the decoding task. As Gallager’s HD BF decoder uses a flipping function (FF) much simpler than those of SD BF decoders and requires only binary operation, our approach not only takes the complexity issue mentioned above into consideration but also enjoys the advantage that the Gallager decoder can be used in conjunction with any SD BF algorithm.

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:57:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: MS BF DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES

1525

Besides simplicity, our use of Gallager’s HD BF decoder as the second-stage decoder is also motivated by the following argument. We first observe that it is very likely that the residual error count is small when a decoding failure (loop) occurs. Hence, a desired property of the second-stage decoder is that it is capable of correcting the small number of errors left by the first-stage decoder with high probability. We will show in Section III-A that Gallager’s BF decoder not only guarantees certain error correcting capability [11] but can correct far more errors beyond the theoretical bound with a reasonably high probability, i.e., it does posses the above desired property. Combining an SD BF algorithm with Gallager’s BF decoder in cascading and employing a loop detector to determine the SS time is therefore a low-complexity solution for enhancing the performance of an SD BF decoder. To further improve the performance, we have to consider the case when a loop does occur again in the second stage. To get out of the second loop with minimum additional complexity, we use a simple variation of the Gallager’s HD BF decoder, to be described in Section III-B, in the third stage as the loop-breaking decoder.
As the time the HD BF decoder takes over coincides with the time a loop occurs and the probability for the decoder to successful decode depends on the number of residual erroneous bits, the first-stage algorithm should try to minimize the (conditional) average residual erroneous bit number in a codeword given a decoding failure has occurred. Such a design goal may not be consistent with that of minimizing either the frame (codeword) error rate (FER) or the bit error rate (BER). Hence, we introduce a new metric measuring the conditional per-frame residual erroneous bit number. For some SD BF algorithms, it is the scaling factor in the FF that affects the performance metric of interest, e.g., FER, BER or the conditional residual error count defined in (5). As an example, we find the optimal scaling factor for the improved modified WBF (IMWBF) algorithm to enhance the overall performance; similar optimization for other SD BF algorithms can bring about improved performance as well.
The numerical results presented in Section IV demonstrate that our methods bring about 1 − 1.5 dB gain no matter which SD BF decoder is used in the first stage. Optimizing the scaling factors further improve the performance of the MSBF (multistage bit-flipping) decoders.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly review the BF algorithms and the FFs used. In Section III, we introduce two MSBF decoding algorithms– a two-stage algorithm and a three-stage one–and explain their underlying design considerations. Numerical results and discussion on the scaling factor are given in Section IV. Finally, conclusion remarks are drawn in Section V.
II. BF DECODING FOR LDPC CODES
We denote by (N, K)(dv, dc) a regular binary LDPC code C of rate R = K/N having an M × N parity check matrix H = [Hmn] with variable node (VN) degree dv and check node (CN) degree dc. A binary codeword u = (u0, u1, . . . , uN−1) is BPSK-modulated and transmitted over an AWGN channel with noise variance σ2. The corresponding

received and decoded binary sequences are denoted by y = (y0, y1, . . . , yN−1) and uˆ = (uˆ0, uˆ1, · · · , uˆN−1), respectively. We denote the nth VN by vn and the mth CN by cm; we define N (m) as the index set of VNs linked to cm and M(n) as that of CNs connected to vn in the code graph.
The FF in a BF decoder is used to estimate the reliability
of decoded decisions. In [1], the following FF

En = −

(1 − 2sm)

(1)

m∈M(n)

is proposed to estimate the reliability of the decisions uˆn, where s = (s0, s1, . . . , sM−1) = uˆ · HT (mod 2) is the syndrome (checksum) vector. In each iteration, the decoder computes the FF and makes bit decisions on those VNs with the maximum FF value, i.e., all uˆi’s where Ei = max0≤n<N En, are selected for flipping (uˆi = uˆi+1 (mod 2)). Then, s is renewed based on the updated uˆ. If s = 0 or the iteration counter, l, reaches the maximum allowed iteration number lmax, the decoding process stops.
By adopting the soft-valued channel information and assigning checksum weights, the WBF algorithm and its variants give improved error-rate performance with respect to the above Gallager’s BF decoder. The IMWBF [4] and the reliability ratio based WBF (RRWBF) [5] algorithms are perhaps the two most well-known WBF algorithms. The FF of the IMWBF algorithm is given by

En = −α|yn| −

wm(I)n(1 − 2sm), α > 0 (2)

m∈M(n)

where wm(I)n = minn ∈N (m)\n |yn |. If we define wm(Rn) = n ∈N (m) |yn |/yn, the FF of the RRWBF algorithm can be
written as

En = −

wm(Rn) (1 − 2sm),

(3)

m∈M(n)

In [6], the mixed modified WBF (MMWBF) algorithm uses (2) and (3) as the main and auxiliary FFs and selects one or two bits for flipping in each iteration. The GDBF algorithm [2] also adopts the soft-valued information in its FF:

En = −xˆnyn −

(1 − 2sm),

(4)

m∈M(n)

where xˆn = 1 − 2uˆn. The GDBF algorithm can outperform WBF algorithms in decoding some LDPC codes.
A quick review of the above FFs reveals that Gallager’s FF (1) is a special case of all the rest. Hence, implementing Gallager’s algorithm in the same decoder incurs no complexity increase except for the need to set some other parameters to one or zero.

III. MULTI-STAGE BF DECODING ALGORITHMS
A. The Choice of the Second-Stage Decoder
As mentioned in Section I, the SD BF decoders may fall into an infinite decoding loop in which a tentative decoded vector repeatedly reappears and the decoder flips the same set of bits periodically, leading to a decoding failure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:57:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1526

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2019

when g = 8 [11] but many more error patterns having much larger weights (< 30 in this case) with high probability.

Fig. 1. The CDF of uncorrected bit numbers after 200 iterations or a loop is detected; PEGReg 504 × 1008 code.
Fig. 2. Correct decoding probability as a function of input error bit number for Gallager’s HD BF decoder; PEGReg 504 × 1008 code (dv = 3, g = 8).

B. A Two-Stage Decoding Algorithm
The above discussions convince us that using Gallager’s HD BF algorithm as the second-stage decoder when the first-stage SD BF decoder falls into a loop yields a high probability of eliminating the residual errors left by the first-stage decoder. In other words, Gallager’s BF decoder is a near-optimal candidate loop breaker when taking simplicity and decoding capability and the ability of getting out of a loop into consideration. The resulting two-stage BF (2SBF) algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.
The above algorithm requires that a loop detector be available. Let uˆ(l) denote the decoded result uˆ corresponding to the lth iteration. Suppose the current iteration index is i. In general, a loop detector needs to check if uˆ(i) is the same as any of previous iterations’ decoding result uˆ(j), 1 ≤ j < i. Hence we sequentially check if uˆ(i) = uˆ(j), j = i − 1, i − 2, . . . , 1. In case  = min{k|k > 0, uˆ(i) = uˆ(i−k)}, i.e.,  is the smallest positive integer such that uˆ(i) = uˆ(i−k), we then say a loop of length  is detected. To keep all uˆ(i) will necessitate some additional storage space. We note that the loop usually occurs only after a certain iterations and the loop length is often not large. Hence we can activate the loop detection process after saying L1 iterations have passed and check if there exists an identical uˆ only in the previous L2 iterations. Both parameters L1 and L2 can be easily found empirically, and the storage requirement can be greatly reduced with proper choices of these two parameters. Note that this loop detector is independent of the BF algorithm used in the first stage and there is no detector parameter which may depend on the operating SNR. The first-stage algorithm and the operating SNR will automatically determine the time a decoding loop occurs.

Fig. 1 provides the simulated cumulated density function (CDF) of the residual errors in an uncorrected frame when different SD BF decoders are used to decode the (1008, 504) regular PEG (denoted by PEGReg 504 × 1008 ) code [13] and a decoding failure occurs. We observe that there remains only few uncorrected bits especially if the SNR is high.
The above observation and the concern of implementation complexity, as mentioned before, motivate us to limit our choice of the next stage decoder to BF decoders. Another critical observation is that during the SD BF decoding process, a very large yn may dominate the FF and a very small yn could make the corresponding weight(s) negligible and the associated checksum sm useless. Oftentimes, these extreme channel values are the major causes for SD BF decoders to be trapped. Therefore, we need to choose a decoder that has little or nothing to do with the channel values, which then rules out the use of most SD BF algorithms.
On the other hand, Fig. 2 indicates that the Gallager’s BF decoder can correct not only all error patterns of weight less than (dv + 1)/2 if the code’s girth g is 6 and up to dv − 1

Algorithm 1 Two-Stage BF (2SBF) Decoding Algorithm Initialization Set the iteration counter l = 1. Step 1 Use the SD BF decoder to decode uˆ and then update
s. If s = 0 or l = lmax, stop and output uˆ; otherwise, l ← l + 1. Step 2 If a decoding loop is detected, go to Step 3; otherwise, go to Step 1. Step 3 Use Gallager’s BF decoder to decode uˆ and then update s. If s = 0 or l = lmax, stop and output uˆ; otherwise, l ← l + 1 and repeat Step 3.
C. A Three-Stage Decoding Algorithm
Using Gallager’s BF decoder as the second-stage decoder in Algorithm 1 still has a chance of being trapped especially when the weights of residual errors in the first stage are not small. When a second loop occurs, one may be tempted to reapply the same concept using another HD BF decoder to break the loop. However, there is no HD BF decoder simpler than the Gallager’s. Another choice is to switch back to the first-stage SD BF algorithm. But the FFs of the SD

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:57:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: MS BF DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES

1527

Fig. 3. FER performance of various SD BF decoding algorithms and their Fig. 4. FER performance of various SD BF decoding algorithms and their

MSBF versions; 50 iterations in total, PEGReg 504 × 1008 code.

MSBF versions; 200 iterations in total, PEGReg 504 × 1008 code.

BF decoders, (2), (3), are all functions of channel values. As pointed out in Section III-A, the extreme channel values either dominate the FF or diminish the usage of checksums, thus if we reapply the same first-stage algorithm, similar error patterns tend to reappear and the decoder just falls into a loop again. Recall that when a loop occurs, the decoder gives oscillating FF values or stays at a local plateaus. A simple method to escape the local valley or plateaus is by performing random moves.
To minimize the decoder complexity, a natural choice is to randomize the second-stage decoder’s decision which leads to a random BF (RBF) decoder. The RBF decoder uses (1) as the FF and randomly selects q (0 < q ≤ p) bits from F to flip where F is the set of those bits having the maximum FF values and p is the cardinality of F .
This three-stage algorithm which appends a RBF stage to Algorithm 1 is called three-stage BF (3SBF) algorithm. The modified loop detection scheme mentioned in the last section is also used to decide when the decoder should switch from the second stage (Gallager’s BF decoder) to the third stage (RBF decoder). However, the additional decoding iteration number in the second stage is often relative small, so L1 should be set to zero. Note that only those uˆ’s in the same decoding stage are to be monitored by the loop detector.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
Figs. 3 and 4 show the FER performance of various SD BF decoders and the corresponding 2SBF and 3SBF decoders for decoding the PEGReg 504 × 1008 code with L2 = 20 and lmax = 50 or 200. The 2SBF (3SBF) algorithm is labeled by χ-2SBF (χ-3SBF) in the figures when an SD BF decoder χ is employed in the first stage. m-GDBF in Fig. 3 denotes the multi-bit flipping version of the GDBF decoder [2]. For the IMWBF, MMWBF, IMWBF-2SBF/3SBF, and MMWBF2SBF/2SBF algorithms, we set α = 0.2. It can be seen that the GDBF-2SBF and m-GDBF-2SBF algorithms yield about 1 dB gain against the GDBF decoder at FER ≈ 10−5, and the WBF-based 2SBF algorithms offer at least 1.5 dB gain against the corresponding original SD BF decoders for the same FER.

Fig. 5. Decoding performance of the IMWBF-based MSBF algorithms with different SS conditions; SNR=5.5 dB, PEGReg 504 × 1008 code.
We also found that, compared with the 2SBF algorithm, our 3SBF algorithm provides better converged FER at low and moderate SNRs and gives approximately 0.25 dB gain at FER ≈ 10−5.
To demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed loop-detection based SS criterion, in Fig. 5, we compare the performance of our 2SBF and 3SBF algorithms and the IMWBF-2SBF algorithm with a fixed first-stage iteration number (20 or 100), and the IMWBF-3SBF algorithm with SS times at either the 20th/40th or the 100th/200th iterations. Those curves clearly show that an early switching (at the 20th/40th iterations) results in significant performance loss while a late switching (at the 100th/200th iterations) spends redundant computing effort in the first or the second stage and causes much slower convergence. Our loop-detection based method does give nearoptimal (if not the optimal) switching times and better FER and convergence performance. The benefit of having the thirdstage decoder can be found in the same figure as well.
For the FF (2), which is used by the IMWBF and MMWBF decoders, the value of the scaling factor α is usually selected to minimize the converged error-rate performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:57:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1528

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2019

IMWBF-2SBF algorithm with different α’s. It can be seen that the IMWBF-2SBF algorithm yields better converged FER performance when α = 0.5 or 1. Since a lower ρ(α) indicates fewer residual bit errors, the HD BF decoder thus has a higher probability to correct these errors.

Fig. 6. BER (PB(α)), FER (PF (α)), and ρ(α) of the IMWBF algorithm with different α’s; PEGReg 504 × 1008 code.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we present two general MSBF decoding algorithms for LDPC codes. Our algorithms are general for any SD BF algorithm that can be used as the first-stage decoder. By properly concatenating SD and HD BF decoders, the proposed 2SBF algorithm provides significant performance gain against known SD BF algorithms. With an RBF decoder in the third stage, the 3SBF algorithm gives further performance gain. Rationales for choosing the second- and thirdstage algorithms are given and a simple loop detector is employed to determine near-optimal SS time. The resulting dynamic SS timing helps to improve both FER and convergence performance. We also find that it is necessary to modify the first-stage SD BF algorithm and suggest a new metric for selecting a proper scaling parameter value to optimize the overall performance using the IMWBF based 2SBF algorithm as an example. We show that although the optimal scaling parameter α is a function of SNR, a near-optimal α which is robust to SNR can be found.

Fig. 7. FER performance of IMWBF-2SBF algorithms with different α’s; PEGReg 504 × 1008 code.

However, these values may not give the optimal performance for the 2SBF and 3SBF algorithms since both SD and HD BF decoders are involved in our design. As a larger number of uncorrected bits left by the SD BF decoder will degrade the Gallager’s HD decoder’s performance, the relation between α and the residual error numbers should be considered in selecting α. Actually, less residual errors from the SD BF decoder ensures that the HD BF decoder has a higher probability of successfully correcting them.
Fig. 6 depicts the converged BER (denoted by PB(α)) and FER performance (denoted by PF (α)) of the IMWBF algorithm when different α values are used in the FF. Also shown in the figure is the conditional average residual error numbers (in an unsuccessfully decoded frame) using different α’s, which is denoted by ρ(α) and to be computed by

ρ(α)

=

PB (α)

·

N .
PF (α)

(5)

We observe that the best BER and FER performance of the IMWBF decoder is achieved at α ≈ 0.2 while the minimum ρ(α) is a function of SNR and lies within α ∈ [0.5, 1]. In Fig. 7, we compare the decoding performance of the

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density paritycheck codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 77, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[5] F. Guo and L. Hanzo, “Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 40, no. 21, pp. 1356–1358, Oct. 2004.
[6] H. Huang, Y. Wang, and G. Wei, “Mixed modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IET Commun., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 283–290, Jan. 2015.
[7] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, E. Xu, and L. Zhang, “Reliability-based iterative decoding of LDPC codes using likelihood accumulation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 677–679, Aug. 2007.
[8] J. Li and X.-D. Zhang, “Hybrid iterative decoding for low-density paritycheck codes based on finite geometries,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 29–31, Jan. 2008.
[9] H. R. Zeidan and M. M. Elsabrouty, “Modified iterative two-stage hybrid decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., Apr. 2009, pp. 1–5.
[10] G. Li, X. Zou, and X. Wang, “Hybrid decoding for one class of lowdensity parity-check codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Commun. Netw., China, Hangzhou, Jan. 2008, pp. 340–343.
[11] W.-Y. Chen and C.-C. Lu, “On error correction capability of bit-flipping algorithm for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul./Aug. 2011, pp. 1283–1286.
[12] Z. Liu and D. A. Pados, “A decoding algorithm for finite-geometry LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 415–421, Mar. 2005.
[13] D. J. C. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. Accessed: Nov. 8, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac. uk/mackay/codes/data.html

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:57:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

