2019 XVIII Workshop on Information Processing and Control (RPIC)
A Genetic Algorithm Decoder for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Over an Impulse Noise Channel
Ramiro Avalos Ribas*, Ivan Exequiel Gelosi*, Monica Cristina Liberatori*, Leonardo Coppolillo*, Alejandro Jose Uriz* and Jorge Castineira Moreira*
*ICYTE (UNMdP - CONICET) School of Engineering, Mar del Plata University
Mar del Plata, Argentina Email: (avalosribas;casti)@fi.mdp.edu.ar

Abstract—In this paper, a decoder for Low-Density ParityCheck codes is proposed. The system employs a genetic algorithm aided by syndrome weight selection and distance logic. Genetic algorithms were chosen due to their capability to perform heuristic searches using evolution-based convergence while also exploring wide spaces. The paper has considered the performance of the decoder over an impulse noise channel, typical to power line communications, and a type of disturbance commonly found in most transmission mediums and devices. The resulting system is shown to perform as well as the standard sum-product decoder, with the additional advantage of not requiring knowledge of the channel information (noise type or power). A parallel decoding topology is proposed, where error rate performance can be improved by the addition of concurrent decoders. Furthermore, this scheme allows for genetic algorithm complexity to be reduced, as the addition of parallel blocks can compensate the individual loss in error rate performance.
Index Terms—Communication Systems, Impulse Noise, LDPC codes, Genetic Algorithm, Sum-Product Algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Efficient error control coding is usually designed for channels with predominantly additive, white, Gaussian noise (AWGN). However, not all channels fit that mathematical model, for their inherent noise can be better described as impulsive in nature. Impulse noise is experienced by most communications systems, and it can be either man-made or naturally occurring [1], This particular type of disturbance is prominently present in the residential power circuit, generated by electrical devices connected to the power lines, or by external noise and interference coupled to the power grids via radiation or conduction [2], It is of importance to achieve high reliability on these impulsive channels, especially with the growing interest on the use of power line communications (PLC) for smart grid and home networking applications [3][7].
In digital communications systems, data are transmitted through channels which are affected by noise. Channel coding appears as an efficient technique to increase the reliability in the transmission. Shannon first demonstrated that using a rather sophisticated coding technique can convert a noisy

channel into an error-free one [8]. Since then, many different ways of encoding information have surfaced.
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes are a type of widely used linear block codes. First introduced by Gallager, the way of constructing such codes provides them with interesting properties when compared to other block codes: with increasing code block length, the error probability decreases exponentially, whereas the minimum distance of the code increases [9].
Gallager's original paper presented an iterative process of decoding these codes, which was capable of achieving excellent bit error rate (BER) performance. This decoding algorithm, known as the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA), determines the probability of each message symbol as a function of the received signal, the code information, and the channel characteristics [10]. Consequently, a decoding algorithm aimed to reach a good BER performance should operate with knowledge of the channel characteristics, or as usually described, with Channel Side Information (CSI).
In order to avoid the need for CSI, alternative decoding techniques have been developed in recent years. In [11], an Euclidean distance based algorithm was proposed, which had virtually the same performance as that of the SPA when operating over Gaussian and Rayleigh noise channels. Genetic algorithms (GAs) were also utilized in [12] and [13] as effective ways of decoding without CSI, also in the presence of Gaussian and Rayleigh noise channel models, respectively. Likewise, these types of algorithm have been found to perform well as decoders for different coding schemes [14]—[17].
In this paper, a GA based decoder is proposed and simulated. The design is orientated to obtain a near-SPA error performance in the transmission of a medium length LDPC code over an impulse noise channel. A GA based approach is recommended since it avoids the need of using channel noise estimators, and operates independently of the noise source and power. Similar decoding techniques have been found in published works, but no attempt (to the knowledge of the Authors) has yet been made to apply these to an impulse noise channel; thus, the main focus of this work is to show

978-1-7281-2363-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

19

IEEE Catalog Number CFP19E27-ART

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 XVIII Workshop on Information Processing and Control (RPIC)

that GA based decoders are applicable and robust in the case of impulse noise. As an additional advantage, the proposed system could be improved in performance with the use of parallel processing.
Section II of this paper reviews general aspects to consider for the design. These include LDPC codes, GAs and the mathematical description for the modelled impulse noise channel. Afterwards, in Section EI, a decoding system topology is proposed, taking into consideration said theoretical framework. Simulations of the proposed scheme are performed, setting its parameters to optimal values empirically. Finally, simulated results are presented and discussed in Section IV.
II. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
A. LDPC Codes
Being a special type of block code, a binary LDPC code is essentially a bijective function that assigns a binary code word vector c, of length n, to each of the binary message vectors m, of length k <n, that would be transmitted. This assignment is characterized by the addition of redundancy, and is represented with a generator matrix G, such that c = GTm. In order for the corresponding decoding to be performed, a matching parity check matrix H is defined. In a Low-Density Parity Check code, as the name implies, the parity check matrix is sparse, which means that it contains relative few "l"s spread among many "0"s. This matrix satisfies the condition He = 0 for all code words. This means that, for any received vector r, the product Hr = S can be computed, with the result S being known as the syndrome vector. If the result is the all-zero vector, then the received vector r is a code word. Otherwise, it is not, meaning that evaluating S can be a way to detect errors in the incoming code words [10].
Encoded information to be transmitted, e.g., the vector Cj, is first modulated, this means, shaped into an electromagnetic signal suited to travel through the channel. When the receiver demodulates this signal, a vector affected by the noise properties of the channel, r i ; is obtained, such that = c, + e. The disturbance vector, e is a random variable, with a probability distribution dependent on the type and level of the channel noise. The purpose of decoding is to successfully determine ci after receiving r^.
The classic LDPC decoding algorithm, the SPA, performs a set of iterative steps in order to estimate the nearest code word to Tj. The iterative process is halted if, after calculating the syndrome condition over the estimated decoded vector at a given iteration, the resulting syndrome vector is the allzero vector. Otherwise, if after a predetermined number of iterations the syndrome does not become the all-zero vector, the decoder is also halted. In order to attain the maximum a posteriori probability, this algorithm makes use of some a priori information related to the characteristics of the channel. When performing the first step of the iterative decoding, the SPA calculates the probability of each symbol from the received vector and the probability density function of the channel. This is helpful when decoding, since it can give the algorithm some notion of the possible values for e. A complete

explanation of the Sum-Product Algorithm can be found in [10].

B. Genetic Algorithms
Genetic algorithms are general purpose, heuristic search algorithms that operate following the general theories of populations and natural evolution. They can be applied to a wide variety of problems [18].
The GA maintains a population of individuals that evolves according to rules of selection and genetic operators. Each individual is a potential solution to the heuristic search, so their conditions of "fitness" are evaluated using the criteria of the problem. The fittest individuals (this is, the best solutions to the problem) are subject to crossover, reproduction, natural selection and migration, and so, generation after generation, the population "evolves" towards optimal individuals (according to the given fitness function). Another aspect of genetics, mutation, is employed in order to add randomness to the population, causing some individuals to differ from the majority; this can help introduce fitter individuals and keep the algorithm from falling into "local minima", or genetic poverty [19].
GAs are sufficiently efficient algorithms to provide adaptable and robust search mechanisms. Thus, depending on the particular problem, an ad-hoc assessment of the fitness function must be made. On the other hand, the performance of a GA depends on the adaptability of the adopted parameters [13], [20],

C. Middleton's "Class A" Impulse Noise Model
The noise inherent in transmitting and receiving systems is for the most part due to thermal effects in both the passive and active elements of the system. This noise follows a Gaussian probability distribution. However, additional noise may enter a communication link, with noticeably different statistical characteristics. A salient feature of such interferences is thenimpulsive nature. These disturbances consist of sequences of pulses, of varying duration and intensity, and with a more or less random occurrence in time [21]. Impulse noise and its effects are found across different fields in communications, such as electromagnetic interference, wireless communications, and recently, power line communications. In [21], Middleton described the phenomenon of impulsive noise, and gave statistical models for it. He later classified his noise models into categories, the most widely accepted of which is the "Middleton Class A" noise model [22],
The probability density function (PDF) for the Class A noise model is a sum of different zero mean Gaussian PDFs with different variances crm2, where the PDFs are weighted by a Poisson PDF Pm. This gives the PDF of a noise sample, as shown in (1).

oo

Fm(nk) =

PmM(nk; 0, am2)

(1)

m=0

978-1-7281-2363-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

20

IEEE Catalog Number CFP19E27-ART

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 XVIII Workshop on Information Processing and Control (RPIC)

Where N{xk\fJ., c2) represents a Gaussian PDF with mean fj, and variance a 2 , from which the kth sample, Xk, is taken.
The weighting Poisson PDF Pm is computed as in (2).

±prii—— AME A

(2)

ml

The Gaussian power om2 utilized in (1) is calculated as shown in (3).

2m

=

-J+a9

(3)

Where a 2 is the variance of the impulse noise and a, 2 is the variance of the background (additive, white and Gaussian) noise. The parameter T = a 2 jo 2 gives the Gaussian to impulse noise power ratio. Equation (2) is the Poisson PDF that weights the Gaussian PDFs. The parameter A represents the density of impulses in an observation period: A = T)T/TQ. Here r] is the average number of impulses per second, r is the average width of those impulses, and To the observation window, such that A < 1 by definition [1].

III. PROPOSED DESIGN
In the transmitter end of the communications channel, klength binary messages are generated and transformed into LDPC code words via a generator matrix. Then, these vectors are modulated and transmitted over a Class A channel. When the coded messages arrive at the receiver, they are contaminated by both Gaussian noise and impulsive distortion. At the receiver, demodulation is performed, and a vector r is obtained. The received vector is decoded using the proposed technique. The first step is to apply a hard threshold and subsequently compute the syndrome; this determines if the received vector is a valid code word. If the computed syndrome is not the all zero vector, the GA decoding is applied. This stage can be performed in parallel, a couple of times for each codeword, because of the inherently random nature of the GA. Finally, by means of proximity logic and syndrome weighting techniques, the best attempt at decoding is chosen.

A. Genetic Algorithm based Decoding System
When errors are detected, decoding algorithms apply certain operations to attempt to correct them. In the case of the proposed decoder, an heuristic search for the correct word is performed. The GA attempts to find the n-length code word that is nearest to the received vector. Proximity is quantified in terms of Euclidean distance, while code membership can be evaluated using the syndrome vector. These factors play a role in the fitness function, that determines the eligibility of each individual in the population, and which the algorithm seeks to minimize.
The algorithm generates a population P of potential candidates or individuals p. Each individual p is a vector with components Pi taken from a uniform random distribution in the range [0,1] of real numbers. The GA obtains the best candidates q among all the vectors in the set. The selection results from the search of the minimum value of the fitness

function. These best candidates are then subject to crossover, and eventual mutation, and a new generation is formed. The process repeats itself until a maximum number of generations have passed, or until the best candidate has passed a set number of generations without changing (the algorithm stalls).
Since the received r vector is comprised of real, non-binary values (affected by random noise), compression helps to map these results to the studied range. As said, individuals in the population are generated from real numbers, uniformly distributed in the [0,1] interval; to fit the values in r into this interval, a sigmoid function is applied to each component in vector r. Thus, the vector is compressed into r, where each component r\ is calculated as is presented in (4).

r<

i+

e-a(ri-c)

With a = min(r), and c the center of the modulation interval (c = 0 in the case of binary phase shift-keying modulation). Proximity is henceforth computed as the distance between the candidate and r. Each of the components Pi of individuals p created by the GA are converted into corresponding binary values by comparing them with the components r\ of vector r, as in (5).

Pi =

if n > Pi if n < pi

(5)

Thus, the individuals manipulated by the GA are not exactly binary vectors, but real ones that are evaluated as having binary components when comparing to the compressed received vector. This means that crossover and mutation operations take place over the individual components of real vectors, which essentially work as evolving thresholds. This approach has proven to be effective in [12], [13], [23],
The driving force behind the GA is its evolution towards the individual that best satisfies a given fitness function. The proposed system seeks to minimize both the weight of the syndrome of the candidate, and its proximity to the received compressed vector. The syndrome accounts for the membership of the proposed n-length word to the code, and as such, is ideally zero. Considering a candidate, p, its syndrome vector is B = Hp. There are v non-zero components 6j in the B vector, such that the weight of the syndrome vector is obtained as shown in (6).

Sw = Y^bi

(6)

Nevertheless, not all zero syndrome words are the correct, transmitted code word. Thus, the code word that is closest to the received vector is considered to be the correct decoding. As previously said, proximity is computed as Euclidean distance (d) to the compressed, received vector.

\ d = i=i

(7)

978-1-7281-2363-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

21

IEEE Catalog Number CFP19E27-ART

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 XVIII Workshop on Information Processing and Control (RPIC)

Since both the syndrome weight and the distance need to be minimized, a possible fitness function would be the product between these two factors. Notwithstanding, such an operation would render the algorithm unable to correctly optimize the distance between proposed code words and the received vector, since all code words would make the fitness function equal to zero. To address this issue, the computed parameters are each summed by 1. The resulting function provided the best results while performing simulations, even when compared to the simple sum of parameters. Although the offset would not be needed for the distance parameter (since the received word is both affected by noise and by a sigmoid function), adding it did achieve marginally better simulation results than omitting it. This is because it balances the weight of both parameters in the fitness function.

Bit Error Rate

ffitness = (Sw + l)(d+l)

(8)

The resulting algorithm should find the word that best minimizes (8). Nevertheless, GAs are susceptible to not always finding the minimum of the fitness function in the maximum allotted time or number of generations. This is mostly due to the possible existence of local minima in the function, and the inherent randomness of the generation, selection, crossover and mutation operations. Thus, two different runs of the same optimization problem could yield different results, and in different amounts of time. As such, for this decoding problem, a total number M of GA runs are proposed. For each received vector, the algorithm is run M times, obtaining that many, genetically chosen, best candidates. From these possible solutions, the best one is selected, using the criterion of lowest syndrome. If many all-zero syndrome vectors are present, the one with the least distance to the received vector is selected. This takes into account the possibility of r being almost equally distant to two possible code words, both local minima of syndrome weight equal to zero.

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

Eb / N0 [dB]

Fig. 1. Bit Error Rate (BER) simulation results.

Frame Error Rate

IV. SIMULATION AND RESULTS
A. Error Rate Performance
All simulations were run using MATLAB. A (204,102) LDPC code was employed to evaluate the system. As for the noise characteristics, a rather noisy, Class A channel was modelled. As is used to in the literature, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was measured in terms of only the background Gaussian noise. Notwithstanding, the impulse noise parameters were set to high values in order to test the proposed decoding scheme in an environment with abundant impulsive disturbances. For all simulations done, impulse density was set to A = 0.1, and AWGN to impulse power ratio, to T = 0.1. The chosen modulation scheme was binary phase shift-keying.
All parameters for the decoder were chosen empirically, running simulations aimed to attain the lowest possible error rate both frame and bit-wise, in a prudential amount of time. The population size was set to 400 individuals, taken from a uniform distribution in the [0,1] interval. The adopted elite count was 2, with a crossover fraction of 0.8, and a

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

Eb / N0 [dB]

Fig. 2. Frame Error Rate (FER) simulation results.

Gaussian mutation probability. Mutation variance was set to 0.5, shrinking by 0.75 of its original value after a maximum number of generations of 100. The amount of GA runs per word was set to M = 15.
For the purposes of comparison, a logarithmic sum-product decoding algorithm was modelled and simulated while operating under the same noise conditions as the proposed GA decoder. This SPA was allowed for a maximum of sixteen iterations to obtain a code word.

978-1-7281-2363-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

22

IEEE Catalog Number CFP19E27-ART

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 XVIII Workshop on Information Processing and Control (RPIC)

TABLE I
HORIZONTAL / VERTICAL COMPLEXITY COMPROMISE

Max. Gen. 100 75 50

M
BER FER BER FER BER FER

12
0.00266 0.065
0.00373 0.090
0.00458 0.131

24
0.00189 0.042
0.00275 0.065
0.00387 0.100

48
0.00156 0.032
0.00324 0.075

96
0.00201 0.045

Decoded word
Fig. 3. Block diagram of the proposed decoder topology. Each genetic block is a singular implementation of the genetic algorithm.
Simulation results are shown in Figures 1 and 2, for both bit and frame error rate (BER and FER), respectively. SNR is shown in terms of the Eb/No ratio. For each value of Eb/No, simulations were performed until at least 100 frame errors were computed, in order to obtain an accurate enough statistic.
After observing Figures 1 and 2, it is noteworthy that error rates were relatively high even for the standard decoder. This was expected given the intensity of the modelled impulse disturbances. While the proposed algorithm falls behind in error rate when compared to the SPA at the 10 to 18 decibel range, it performs noticeably better, in both BER and FER, at an Eb/N0 of 20 dB and higher.
B. Genetic Blocks
As an additional test to the system, its aptitude for parallel implementation was evaluated. Consider each of the decoding attempts as a singular instance of a GA decoder. Let us call each of these instances a genetic block, which runs for a maximum of 100 generations. In a parallel implementation, the average time elapsed by M genetic blocks would theoretically be roughly the same no matter the value of M. Thus, a system topology is proposed, where each demodulated received vector is then provided to M genetic blocks simultaneously. Afterwards, a syndrome and distance based selection is performed as described in Section III. A diagram is shown in Figure 3.
This topology can be synthesized in a field programmable gate array (FPGA). The array would allow for each genetic block to operate independently and simultaneously. By observing the diagram in Figure 3, the amount of genetic blocks could be referenced as horizontal complexity, and the amount of generations per block, as vertical complexity. In an attempt to evaluate the changes in the error rate, both parameters were subject to modifications, while keeping the SNR constant. The procedure was to increase M, starting at 12, until a FER of 0.05 or lower was obtained. This was done for different

amounts of vertical complexity, at a SNR of Eb/No = 14. Results are summarized in Table I.
In a real implementation of this system, decoding time would be related to the maximum amount of generations the algorithm is allowed to evolve. Reducing this number would naturally diminish decoding time, but at the cost of decreasing the chance of converging to the best individual. This would impact negatively on the error rates of a single genetic block. However, as shown by this experiment, expanding the amount of genetic blocks working simultaneously can compensate for this loss. Consequently, a real implementation of this system could theoretically be improved in decoding latency by adding more parallel genetic blocks, and reducing the number of maximum generations. This reduction should not be too heavy, at the risk of losing the evolution-guided convergence capabilities of the GA, thus turning it into a random-search one.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a decoding system was proposed and simulated for an impulsive Class A Middleton channel. The designed topology was based around genetic algorithm blocks. Results showed lower error rates than the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) at higher signal-to-noise ratio. This implies that the proposed system should be better suited for operating with low error rates than the standard algorithm, at channels with a high amount (and intensity) of impulse disturbances per unit of time. Furthermore, the genetic algorithm decoder makes no use of Channel Side Information, while the standard SPA does. This avoids the need for the decoding system to performing complicated random estimations of the channel characteristics, while also making the proposed algorithm adaptable to channels with different noise type or intensity.
The topology discussed in Section IV-B, composed of concurrent genetic blocks, can add further adaptability to a real implementation of the proposed decoding scheme. This can be achieved by modifying the maximum number of generations of each block, changing the average decoding times proportionately. A reduction in the amount of generations can be accompanied by an increase in the amount of blocks, to compensate for the loss in error rate. This aptitude to parallel implementation is not found in the standard sumproduct decoding algorithm.

978-1-7281-2363-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

23

IEEE Catalog Number CFP19E27-ART

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 XVIII Workshop on Information Processing and Control (RPIC)

The promising results obtained here for the Class A channel lead to conclude that the technique is applicable, robust, and adaptable to practically any communications channel. The only necessary previous step would be the corresponding optimization of the parameters involved, mainly, the maximum number of generations, and the amount of concurrent genetic blocks.
As a further line of work, the proposed system will be implemented in a field programmable gate array (FPGA), in order to test the achievable ranges of decoding latency. Similarly, the potential improvements in the error rate with the addition of concurrent genetic blocks shall be verified.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the National University of Mar del Plata, which funded this research under the project "Applications of Communications and Information Theory", code 15G/508.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Shongwe, A. J. Han Vinck and H. C. Ferreira, "A Study on Impulse Noise and its Models". SAIEE Africa Research Journal, vol. 106, pp. 119-131. 2015.
[2] O. G. Hooijen, "A Channel Model for the Residential Power Circuit Used as a Digital Communications Medium". IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 40, no. 4, Nov. 1998.
[3] H. Nakagawa, D. Umehara, S. Denno and Y. Morihiro, "A Decoding for Low Density Parity Check Codes over Impulsive Noise Channels". International Symposium on Power Line Communications and Its Applications, 2005., Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 85-89. 2005.
[4] H.-M. Oh, Y.-J. Park, S. Choi, J.-J. Lee and K.-C. Whang, "Mitigation of Performance Degradation by Impulsive Noise in LDPC Coded OFDM System". Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Power Line Communications, Orlando, Florida, USA, pp. 331-336. Mar. 2006.
[5] S. Galli, A. Scaglione, Z. Wang, "For the Grid and Through the Grid: The Role of Power Line Communications in the Smart Grid". Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 998-1027. June 2011.
[6] F. Passerini and A. M. Tonello, "Smart Grid Monitoring Using Power Line Modems: Anomaly Detection and Localization". IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid. Feb. 2019. [Online], Available: IEEE Xplore Digital Library, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8641473. [Accessed April 2019],

[7] L. Lampe and L. T. Berger, "Power Line Communications" in "Transmission Techniques for Digital Communications". Academic Press Library in Mobile and Wireless Communications. Ch. 16, pp. 621-659. 2016.
[8] C. E. Shannon, "A Mathematical Theory of Communication". Bell Syst. Tech. J. vol. 27, pp. 379-423, 623-656. July, 1948
[9] R. G. Gallager, "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes". IRE Trans. Information Theory, vol. IT-8, N ° l , pp. 21-28. Jan, 1962.
[10] J. Castineira Moreira and P. G. Farrel, "Essentials of Error-Control Coding". John Wiley & Sons, pp. 277-282. 2006.
[11] P. G. Farrel, L. J. Arnone and J. Castineira Moreira "Euclidean distance soft-input soft-output decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes". IET Commun., vol. 5, Iss. 16, pp. 2364-2370. 2011.
[12] A. G. Scandurra, A. D. Pra, L. J. Arnone and L. I. Passoni, "A Genetic Algorithm Based Decoder for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes". Latin American applied research, vol. 36, pp. 169-172. 2006.
[13] M. C. Liberatori, L. J. Arnone, A. G. Scandurra and J. Castineira Moreira, "A Genetic Algorithm Based Decoder for Low-Density ParityCheck Codes over a Rayleigh Channel". XIV Workshop on Information Processing and Control, FI UNER, Oro Verde, Entre Ri'os, Argentina. Nov. 16-18. 2011.
[14] H. Maini, K. Mehrotra, C. Mohan and S. Ranka, "Genetic Algorithms for Soft Decision Decoding of linear block codes". Journal of Evolutionary Computation, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 145-164. June 1994.
[15] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer and S. ten Brink, "Genetic Algorithm-based Polar Code Construction for the AWGN Channel". 12th International ITG Conference on Systems, Communications and Coding, Rostock, Germany. Feb. 2019.
[16] A. Azouaoui and M. Belkasmi, "A Soft Decoding of Linear Block Codes by Genetic Algorithms". International Conference on Intelligent Computational Systems. Dubai, pp 55-61. Jan. 2012.
[17] A. Azouaoui, M. Askali and M. Belkasmi, "A genetic algorithm to search of good double-circulant codes". 2011 International Conference on Multimedia Computing and Systems, Ouarzazate, pp. 1-5. Apr. 2011.
[18] J. R. Koza, "Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selection". MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. 1963
[19] J. H. Holland, "Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems". MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. Apr. 1992.
[20] J. Schaffer, J. Caruana, L. Eshelman and R. Das, "A study of control parameters affecting online performance of genetic algorithms for function optimization". Proc. of the Third international Conference on Genetic Algorithms, San Mateo, CA, pp. 51-60. 1989.
[21] D. Middleton, "An Introduction to Statistical Communication Theory". McGraw-Hill, New York. pp. 490-498. 1960.
[22] D. Middleton, "Statistical-Physical Models of Electromagnetic Interference". IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. EMC19, no. 3, pp. 106-127. Aug. 1977.
[23] H. Chaibi, A. Berkani and M. A. Faqihi, "Syndrome Weight Decision based Genetic Algorithm Decoder for LDPC Codes". International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 127, no. 6, pp. 38-43. Oct. 2015.

978-1-7281-2363-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

24

IEEE Catalog Number CFP19E27-ART

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:59:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

