IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

4991

Adaptive Belief Propagation Decoding of CRC Concatenated NR LDPC and Polar Codes
Mingyang Zhu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Ming Jiang , Member, IEEE, and Chunming Zhao , Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this paper, we propose a modified adaptive belief propagation (ABP) algorithm, which is referred to as the random ABP (R-ABP) algorithm, for decoding short channel codes adopted in the fifth generation (5G) New Radio (NR) wireless systems. Based on the cyclic redundancy check (CRC) concatenation structure of 5G channel codes, we can take partial or even all CRC bits into iterative R-ABP decoding to improve the error correction performance, while the error detection capability can still be guaranteed by the remaining CRC bits and a proposed threshold-based acceptance criterion. We call this improved R-ABP decoding the threshold-and-CRC-aided R-ABP (TCA-R-ABP) decoding. The simulation results show that our proposed TCA-R-ABP algorithm outperforms the state-of-theart decoding algorithms for many 5G low-density parity-check (LDPC) and polar codes. Moreover, the proposed TCA-R-ABP algorithm leads to a unified decoder for LDPC and polar codes, which has the potential to be a lower-complexity decoder over the combination of the belief propagation (BP) and CRC-aided successive cancellation list (CA-SCL) decoders.
Index Terms— Concatenated codes, LDPC codes, polar codes, adaptive belief propagation, CRC-aided decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) [1] and polar [2] codes are two coding schemes adopted in the fifth generation (5G) New Radio (NR) wireless systems [25]. Many well-designed long-blocklength LDPC codes, such as the protograph-based raptor-like (PBRL) LDPC codes [3] and the spatially-coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes [4], have capacity-approaching performance under belief propagation (BP) decoding using the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [5] or the min-sum algorithm (MSA) [6]. The LDPC codes used in the 5G systems are a type of PBRL LDPC codes that have rate-compatible structures and support various lifting factors. Polar codes, as devised by Arıkan [2], achieve the systematic capacity of any given binary-input discrete memoryless channel under successive cancellation (SC) decoding,
Manuscript received 6 April 2022; revised 6 June 2022; accepted 11 June 2022. Date of publication 20 June 2022; date of current version 16 August 2022. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFB1801103) and the Jiangsu Province Basic Research Project (Grant No. BK20192002). The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was P. Trifonov. (Corresponding author: Ming Jiang.)
The authors are with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China, and also with the Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China (e-mail: zhumingyang@seu.edu.cn; jiang_ming@seu.edu.cn; cmzhao@seu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2022.3184359.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2022.3184359

assuming infinite-length codes. In recent years, serially concatenated polar codes become an active area of research for their excellent finite-length performance under SC list (SCL) decoding [7], [8], where the information bits are pre-coded by a high-rate outer code such as cyclic redundancy check (CRC) codes or convolutional codes [9]. In the 5G standard, both LDPC and polar codes are concatenated with CRC codes, which are selected from 6-bit, 11-bit, 16-bit, and 24-bit CRC codes according to the channels, inner coding schemes, and payload lengths [25].
There is extensive literature showing that powerful long LDPC codes almost achieve the capacity of the binary erasure channel (BEC) and the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [4], [10], [11]. However, the performance of finite-length LDPC codes, particularly very short codes, is far away from the finite blocklength bound [12], which is also known as a dispersion approximation. This is generally due to numerous short cycles in the paritycheck matrices (PCMs) of short LDPC codes, which break the message independence assumption in the BP algorithm. Hence, the BP algorithm becomes sub-optimal for short LDPC codes, and the decoding performance can be further improved. Another interesting problem for short LDPC codes is that the CRC bits greatly reduce the coding efficiency while they can hardly be used to enhance the error correction capability for BP decoders.
CRC-polar concatenated codes have been widely investigated over past few years due to their good finite-length performances. CRC-aided SCL (CA-SCL) decoding [7], [8] of CRC-polar concatenated codes even outperforms the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding of pure polar codes. Although the recursive structures of the SC and its improved algorithms can be effectively implemented in hardware [27], these algorithms are essentially performed in a serial fashion, leading to a challenge in the design of high-parallelism decoders. Cammerer et al. proposed an LDPC-like BP decoding algorithm using a pruned sparse PCM to highly parallelize the decoding of polar codes [23]. Unfortunately, the LDPC-like BP decoding performs similar to SC decoding but far away from CASCL decoding. Recently, the ordered statistics decoding (OSD) and its variations [13]– [15] have been researched to enhance the decoding of polar codes. However, these OSD-based algorithms either perform away from CA-SCL decoding with a large list, or their decoding complexity/latency is relatively high due to high-order OSD. The performance of (CA-)SCL

0090-6778 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

decoding improves rapidly as the list size becomes larger, but its computational complexity grows linearly with the list size. For example, a (CA-)SCL decoder with list size of 256 gives a superior error performance, but its computational complexity is too high to be implemented for real-time applications. Moreover, a very large list for a CA-SCL decoder weakens the error detection ability when the attached CRC length is not sufficiently long, which is also a commonly considered problem for control information transmission [24].
In this paper, the adaptive BP (ABP) algorithm is improved to enhance the decoding of short concatenated LDPC and polar codes in the 5G standard. The ABP algorithm, proposed by Jiang and Narayanan [16], improves the soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon (RS) codes by iteratively decoding on adapted PCMs, and has been generalized to decode other block codes with dense PCMs [17]. Contrast to the conventional BP algorithm, the Gaussian elimination is carried out in each iteration of ABP decoding to systematize the columns associated with the least reliable variable nodes (LRVNs) to an identity matrix, where the LRVNs can be evaluated by the absolute log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values. In [18], the idea of ABP decoding of polar codes with their PCMs was proposed. While, the concatenation of the CRC code does not play a role in ABP decoding in [18], thus the decoding can not approach the performance of CA-SCL for short polar codes. We note that [19] proposed the CRC-aided BP list decoding, in which the SPA is applied to the PCM of the CRC code to generate soft information. However, due to the dense PCM of the CRC code, the error-correcting capability of the CRC code is difficult to be fully exploited by the SPA, particularly for long CRC codes. Differently, ABP decoding is more suitable for a dense PCM. The main contributions of this paper are listed as follows:
• We propose the random ABP (R-ABP) algorithm to overcome the problem of the ABP decoder being trapped in a local optimum. In conventional ABP decoding, the decoder is likely to be trapped in a local optimum if there are some erroneous bits having large LLRs. In the proposed R-ABP decoding, we introduce the artificial noise to perturb the selection of LRVNs, which makes the erroneous bits with large LLRs have a probability to be chosen into LRVNs. The simulation results show that the R-ABP decoding outperforms the conventional one, especially in high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regions.
• We improve the R-ABP decoding by utilizing the CRC concatenation structure and a proposed threshold-based acceptance criterion. The improved R-ABP decoding is called the threshold-and-CRC-aided R-ABP (TCA-R-ABP) decoding. In the proposed TCA-R-ABP decoding, the (part of) CRC code is taken into iterative decoding to enhance the error correction capability, while the proposed threshold criterion can still guarantee the error detection ability. The simulation results show that the TCA-R-ABP is capable of surpassing the state-of-theart decoding algorithms for many short 5G LDPC and polar codes.
• LDPC and polar codes can be decoded by TCA-R-ABP decoding with a unified decoder that shares the same

hardware architecture. The unified decoder offers a potential advantage in decoding complexity over the combination of BP and CA-SCL decoders. The complexity analyses in Sec. V show that the TCA-R-ABP algorithm has much lower average computational complexity than the CA-SCL decoding with list size of 32 for short polar codes. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces some background information about concatenated codes, the ABP algorithm, and undetected errors. In Section III, we propose the TCA-R-ABP algorithm. Section IV gives some simulation results of 5G LDPC and polar codes. The computational complexities of the proposed TCA-R-ABP algoirthm and other popular decoding algorithms are analysed in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Concatenated Codes
Concatenated coding is a powerful technique to combine two or more component codes for constructing a longer code. A classical concatenated coding scheme uses a binary code and a non-binary code as the inner code and the outer code, respectively, where the binary encoding is performed for each non-binary code symbol [31], [32]. Whereas, the serial concatenated coding scheme is more common in many communication systems such as the digital video broadcasting (DVB-S2) standard [33], where the encoding process includes two steps in a serial fashion: encode the information sequence to an (n1, k1) code C1 and then encode C1 to an (n, k) code C2. Obviously, k = n1. Similar to the classical concatenated coding scheme, C1 and C2 are the outer and inner codes, respectively. Let G1 and G2 be the generator matrices of C1 and C2, respectively. The concatenated codeword v = (v0, v1, . . . , vn−1) can be obtained from the information sequence u = (u0, u1, . . . , uk1−1) by v = uG1G2.
Similarly, decoding of a concatenated code is usually divided into two steps: first decode the inner code and then use the soft or hard information output from the inner code to decode the outer code. If the inner code is a systematic code, the whole PCM Hc of the concatenated code can be directly obtained as the following form:

Hc =

-

H– 1–

|O –-

-

H2

,

(1)

where H1 and H2 are the PCMs of the outer code and inner code, respectively, and O is a zero matrix with size (k − k1) × (n − k).
In the 5G communication standard, LDPC and polar codes
are two schemes for channel coding, and the concatenation of
CRC codes (outer code) with these two codes is for error
detection. Therefore, CRC-LDPC and CRC-polar concate-
nated codes are transmitted over the channel. In this paper, we assume a systematic CRC encoder is used. An (n1, k1) CRC code can be uniquely specified by its generator polynomial g(X) = g0+g1X +· · ·+gn1−k1 Xn1−k1 or parity polynomial h(X) = (Xn1 + 1) /g(X) = h0 + h1X + · · · + hk1 Xk1 .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: ADAPTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF CRC CONCATENATED NR LDPC AND POLAR CODES

4993

Fig. 1. The Tanner graph associated to the adapted PCM.

Then, the PCM of the CRC code is of the form:

⎡

⎤

hk1 hk1−1 · · · h0

H1 = ⎣⎢⎢⎢

hk1 hk1−1 · · · h0 ... ... ... ...

⎥⎥⎦⎥

. (2)

hk1 hk1−1 · · · h0 (k−k1)×k

In this paper, we consider binary phase-shift key-
ing (BPSK) transmission over a binary-input AWGN channel. The codeword is mapped into a BPSK sequence x = (x0, x1, . . . , xn−1), where xi = 1 − 2vi, and the received sequence y is represented as y = x + w, where each entry wi of the noise sequence w is a Gaussian random variable with mean zero and variance σ2. The initial log-likelihood
ratio (LLR) of each code bit can be calculated by

L(vi)

=

log Pr(vi Pr(vi

= =

0|y) 1|y) ,

i = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1.

(3)

The ratio of energy-per-information bit Eb to the one-sided noise power spectral density N0 is defined by (4) throughout the paper, where we only consider the code rate of inner code.

Eb/N0

=

n 2σ2k .

(4)

B. Adaptive Belief Propagation
The adaptive belief propagation (ABP) algorithm was proposed in [16] for soft-decision decoding of RS codes. Before each iteration in ABP decoding, the PCM will be adapted based on the bit reliabilities, which can be evaluated by the absolute LLR values. The columns corresponding to the least reliable n − k code bits, which are called the least reliable variable nodes (LRVNs), are converted to an identity matrix using Gaussian elimination.1 Hence, each LRVN is connected to only one check node and the propagation of its less reliable soft information is reduced. Let Vl = {v0l , v1l , . . . , vnl −1} be the ordered set of variable nodes (VNs) for the l-th iteration, where L(v0l ) ≤ L(v1l ) ≤ · · · ≤ L(vnl −1) . Since each variable node is mapped to a code bit, we still use the notation vi to denote the variable node which is also used to represent a code bit. In Fig. 1, {v0l , v1l , . . . , vnl −k−1} are LRVNs, which are mapped to the identity matrix part and connected to only
1The columns corresponding to n − k smallest absolute LLR values may not form a full-rank matrix, then a greedy algorithm [16] can be used to find n − k least reliable columns with full rank. For a more concise description, we do not emphasize the concept of “full-rank columns” in this paper, but actually the chosen least reliable columns should be full-rank.

one check node ci each, while {vnl −k, vnl −k+1, . . . , vnl −1} are the most reliable variable nodes (MRVNs) mapped to the dense

part.

The massage passing process of the ABP is somewhat

similar to that of the conventional BP, while the a posteriori

probability (APP) based updating scheme [20] is employed

since the check to variable (C2V) and variable to check

(V2C) messages are not appropriate for the continuously

varying PCMs. The APP-based updating scheme was first

proposed to reduce the computational complexity and storage

requirement of conventional BP decoders, and Jiang and

Narayanan also used a similar updating scheme for their

ABP decoder [16].

Let N (ci) denote the set of variable nodes connected to the check node ci, and N (ci)\vj denote the subset of N (ci) without the variable node vj. Similarly, let M(vj ) denote the set of check nodes connected to the variable node vj, and M(vj )\ci denote the subset of M(vj) without the check node ci. For
the check-node and variable-node updating in the l-th iteration,

we use ψ (·) to represent one iteration of the MSA, which is

actually used in our ABP process for simplification. Then, each

iteration generates a sum vector of extrinsic LLRs, denoted by

Lel xt = (Lel xt(v0l ), . . . , Llext(vnl −1)), i.e.,

⎛

⎞

Lel xt vjl =

⎝

sgn Ll (vj ) ⎠

ci∈M(vjl ) vj ∈N (ci)\vjl

· min Ll (vj ) . (5)
vj ∈N (ci)\vjl

The LLR of each code bit is updated using the sum of extrinsic LLRs as:

Ll+1(vjl ) = Ll(vjl ) + αLel xt(vjl ),

(6)

where α ∈ [0, 1] is a damping factor. Various grouping of LRVNs can greatly help the ABP
algorithm to improve the performance, in which we run the ABP decoding several times with the same initial LLRs from
the channel but a different grouping of the LRVNs [16].
The number of different groupings can also be represented as the number of outer iterations. We use ABP(N1, N2) to denote the ABP decoding with N1 inner iterations and N2 outer iterations. The method of regrouping LRVNs is described as follows. The variable nodes are ordered by the initial LLRs from the channel in V0 = {v00, v10, . . . , vn0−1}, where L(v00) ≤ L(v10) ≤ · · · ≤ L(vn0−1) . In the I-th outer iteration, for I > 0, we adjust κ MRVNs Vκ0 = {vn0−k+(I−1)κ, vn0−k+(I−1)κ+1, . . . , vn0−k+Iκ−1} to the least reliable side, then {Vκ0, V0\Vκ0} is taken as the ordered VNs to be adapted in the first inner iteration of the I-th outer iteration, for I > 0. Note that the regrouping operation only takes place when the number I of outer iterations satisfies I > 0 and the number l of inner iterations satisfies l = 0.
Another variation to improve the performance is to form
the degree-2 random connection (D2RC) [16], which makes
the degree-1 columns in the identity matrix part into degree-2 structures. In [16], the authors pointed out that D2RC
operations can improve the error correction performance, but

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

we notice that these operations can also reduce undetected errors extensively. Without the D2RC, iterative decoding on a systematic matrix usually leads the decoding results to valid codewords, which is harmful to UER. Since UER is taken into account in this paper, the D2RC is important, and we also present a modified D2RC method in Sec. III.
C. The Measures of Error Detection Performance
There are two scenarios [24] for the decoder to generate an undetected error as follows:
In the first scenario, when an intended signal from the user equipment or the base station arrives, the decoder tries to retrieve the transmitted information and provide a decoded sequence. It is desired to lower the frame error rate (FER) or bit error rate (BER) by a more powerful method. When the decoder generates an error sequence, which is also a valid codeword satisfying all check equations of the inner and outer codes, an undetected error2 appears. Undetected errors are usually more harmful than the detectable errors to the receiver since these decoding failures can not be recognized and a quick response for retransmission is not evoked in the physical layer. Therefore, lowering the undetected error rate (UER) is very important for some high-reliability or lowlatency transmissions, in particular for control information.
The second scenario is a no transmission case. Although there is no signal transmitted to the receiver, the receiver may take the noise as a valid signal. If the decoder outputs a valid codeword by accident using the noise input, a false alarm appears. The false alarm ratio (FAR) is defined as the ratio of the number of false alarms to the number of decoding trials for the noise input. In the 5G standard, the minimum requirement of the discontinuous transmission to acknowledgment (DTX-to-ACK) probability, which is a kind of FAR, for physical uplink control channel (PUCCH) transmissions is 1% [26].
We present some brief analyses for the FAR and UER of 5G channel coding schemes. A J-bit CRC code is attached to an LDPC or polar code for error detection. For an LDPC decoder using BP algorithm, the decoded information bits can be seen as a random sequence for the CRC code when the decoder input is Gaussian white noise, thus the probability that a random sequence satisfies J-bit constraint is equal to 2−J . Similarly, a random sequence satisfies (n − k)-bit constraint for an LDPC code is 2−(n−k). However, the decoded sequence can not be seen as a random sequence for the LDPC code as its PCM participates in iterative BP decoding, which makes the probability that the decoded sequence is a valid LDPC codeword much larger than 2−(n−k). We may use Pu to denote the probability that all of the parity-check equations for the LDPC code are satisfied after BP decoding on only noise input. The FAR of the BP decoder is equal to Pu × 2−J .
For a polar code under CA-SCL decoding, the FAR will rise as the list size η increases. Let ρ(J, η) denote the probability that at least one of η random bit sequences satisfies J-bit CRC. Hence, the FAR of the CA-SCL decoder with a size-η list is
2For a more accurate clarification, the undetected errors discussed in this paper are error patterns after decoding.

equal to that from [24]:

ρ(J, η) = 1 − (1 − 2−J )η ≈ η · 2−J .

(7)

Now we consider the UER of two decoders. When a linear
code is only used for error detection, the average probability of an undetected error for the (n, k) linear systematic code ensemble is upper bounded by 2−(n−k) [32, Ch. 3]. We use
this bound to approximate the probability of missed detections for a J-bit CRC code as 2−J . Since the BP decoder for
LDPC codes does not take CRC codes into error correction, 2−J can still be taken as an approximation of the UER (after
decoding) for CRC codes. Let Pu be the probability that all of the parity-check equations for the inner code are satisfied
when the BP decoder generates an error sequence. The UER
of the BP decoder is given by

UER ≈ FER × Pu × 2−J .

(8)

In general, Pu is much smaller than 1. Note the probability Pu is influenced by the input of decoder, so the Pu used here is not equal to the Pu used for calculating the FAR of BP decoders.
For the CA-SCL decoder, let Pe denote the probability that all η paths are different from the transmitted sequence and
Pe denote the probability that one of all paths is correct but the decoder accepts an incorrect path. In general, the decoder
will accept the path that satisfies the CRC and has the largest
path metric, thus Pe is very small. The UER and FER for the CA-SCL decoder can be expressed as

UER = Peρ (J, η) + (1 − Pe) Pe,

(9)

FER = Pe + (1 − Pe) Pe,

(10)

respectively. From (9) and (10), the ratio of the UER to FER for the CA-SCL decoder is slightly larger than the FAR.
In this paper, we focus on the aforementioned first scenario, thus we consider UER for evaluating error detection performance. A good tradeoff between FER and UER is of prime importance in high-reliability wireless communication systems with the automatic repeat request. Based on the minimum requirement of FAR (denoted by FARreq) for PUCCH in the 5G standard and the empirical criterion, we set the minimum requirement of UER (denoted by UERreq) to 1% of the FER. This minimum requirement of UER is more strict than that of FAR for PUCCH due to UERreq ≤ 0.01 × FER = FARreq × FER ≤ FARreq.

III. TCA-R-ABP DECODING OF CONCATENATED CODES
A. ABP Decoding With Random Mechanisms
In the conventional ABP decoding [16], the matrix adaption completely depends on bit reliabilities (i.e., the absolute values of LLRs). In the inner round, always (n − k) columns associated with the smallest absolute values of LLRs are eliminated to an identity matrix (assuming they are independent). Although the outer round can change the selection of LRVNs at the initial step, only very few (e.g., 2, 3) MRVNs with the lowest reliability will be regrouped into the LRVNs. In this way, if some MRVNs with relatively large absolute values of LLRs are in error, they may never be adjusted to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: ADAPTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF CRC CONCATENATED NR LDPC AND POLAR CODES

4995

the identity matrix part and then the ABP decoder can not

converge to the correct codeword. To overcome this problem,

we propose the random ABP (R-ABP) algorithm, in which

random mechanisms are introduced. The proposed random

mechanisms include two aspects: the random grouping and

the partial D2RC.

Firstly, we apply artificial noise to introduce “randomness”

into the grouping of MRVNs and LRVNs in each iteration.

The artificial noise can be generated by various distributions,

in this paper, we use Gaussian artificial noise with mean zero and variance σa2. Moreover, we can take the soft demodulation factor 2/σ2 into the artificial noise to make it be independent

with varying SNR. Therefore, we can generate a Gaussian

artificial noise sequence a = {a0, a1, . . . , an−1} in each

iteration,

where

ai

∼

N (0,

4σa2 σ4

)

and

N (μ,

σ2)

is

the

density

of

a Gaussian distribution. Then, the grouping operation depends

on the sum of the LLRs and the artificial noise, i.e., the ordered

VN set Vl = {v0l , v1l , . . . , vnl −1} is constructed according to

L(v0l ) + av0l ≤ L(v1l ) + av1l ≤ · · · ≤ L(vnl −1) + avnl −1 . (11)

Note that we reuse the ordered VN vil to represent the corresponding index j of the code bit for the simplicity of notations. After that, we choose the LRVNs and eliminate their corresponding columns to an identity matrix. Besides, for outer iterations, the various grouping can naturally be done by the above random grouping. Thus, in R-ABP decoding, an outer iteration is equivalent to a re-initialization of the decoder using the LLRs from the channel, without any other operations such as exchanging some ordered bits.
Remark 1: The Gaussian artificial noise can be pre-generated and stored in look-up tables (LUTs), since the arithmetical realization of Gaussian random variables is costly for hardware.
Remark 2: The “randomness” is only introduced for the grouping operation to choose LRVNs, but the message passing decoding still uses original LLRs without artificial noise.
Secondly, we propose a configurable D2RC strategy, in which partial columns in the identity matrix part are made to have a degree of two. The original D2RC [16] uses (n − k − 1) row additions to make (n − k − 1) columns in the identity matrix part be of degree-2, and the other one column still be of degree-1. However, we find that the FER performance can be improved if a suitable number between 0 and (n−k−1) of column are left of degree-1. It indicates that the computational complexity of the D2RC can be reduced while the FER performance can be improved through the partial D2RC. Therefore, we adjust the number of degree-2 columns by a ratio λD2 ∈ [0, 1], which should be optimized in the simulation. The partial D2RC in described in Algorithm 1.
By combining the random grouping and the partial D2RC, we give the R-ABP algorithm in Algorithm 2.
Now we give a brief explanation for the improvement caused by the proposed random mechanisms. It is obvious that LLRs with incorrect signs in the dense part are very harmful to ABP decoding, since the errors may quickly propagate via

Algorithm 1 Partial Degree-2 Random Connection Algorithm

Input: λD2 ∈ [0, 1], H = [hi,j]m×n Output: H

1 Generate a random permutation {p0, p1, . . . , pm−1} of numbers from 0 to m − 1;

2 for i = 0 to mλD2 − 2 do 3 for j = 0 to n − 1 do

4

hpi,j = hpi,j ⊕ hpi+1,j

5 end

6 end

Algorithm 2 R-ABP Algorithm

Input: H, y = (y0, y1, . . . , yn−1), σa, σ, λD2
Output: vˆ = (vˆ0, vˆ1, . . . , vˆn−1)
1 Set the inner and outer iteration numbers l1 = l2 = 0, and initialize the LLRs L0 = y;

2 while l2 < N2 do

3 Random grouping: Randomly group MRVNs and

LRVNs according to the absolute values of Ll1 + a,

where

ai

∼

N (0,

4σa2 σ4

);

4 Gaussian elimination: Eliminate the columns of

LRVNs to an identity matrix;

5 Partial D2RC: Apply the partial D2RC given by

Algorithm 1;

6 APP-based MSA: Calculate the extrinsic LLRs by (5) and update the a posteriori LLRs Ll1+1 by (6);

7 Hard decision: vˆ = 1 − sgn(Ll1+1) /2;

8 if HvˆT = 0 then Break ; 9 else if l1 < N1 − 1 then l1 = l1 + 1; 10 else l1 = 0, l2 = l2 + 1; 11 end

the dense network. Based on this point, we define a cost function E(·), which characterizes the harm of incorrect LLRs in the dense part. This function can show how the proposed random mechanisms help the ABP decoding break the “trap” (i.e., several incorrect LLRs have relatively large magnitudes).
Definition 1: Define a cost function E(·) for ABP decoding on an m × n PCM as

n−1

E (x, L, V) = −

tanh

i=m,xvi L(vi)<0

xvi L (vi) 2

(12)

where x ∈ {±1}n, L, and V = {v0, v1, . . . , vn−1} are the BPSK symbol sequence, the LLRs, and the ordered VN set,

respectively.

The cost function E(·) is closely related to the number

of occurrences of incorrect LLRs (i.e., xvi L (vi) < 0) in the dense part. But differently, we map the corresponding

LLRs into tanh domain (i.e., [−∞, +∞] → [−1, +1]) and

use tanh

xvi L(vi) 2

as weighting factors. The decoder has a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

high probability to output the correct codeword if E(·) can converge to its global minimum value 0.
In the following Example 1, we show the performance improvement caused by the proposed R-ABP decoding, and use the cost function E(·) to give some explanations.
Example 1: We consider three polar codes in this example: (64, 16), (128, 64), and (128, 96). Each polar code is concatenated with a CRC code, which is only for error detection here. The FER performance comparisons between the R-ABP and ABP decoding are shown in Fig. 2 (a). For both the R-ABP and ABP, three fundamental parameters are set to N1 = 20, N2 = 3, and α = 0.12. Specifically for the R-ABP, σa and λD2 are given in the figure. We can see that the R-ABP outperforms the conventional ABP particularly in low-FER regions. For instance, the R-ABP outperforms the ABP by 0.5 dB at an FER of about 2 × 10−3 for the (128, 64) polar code. In Fig. 2 (b), we calculated the cost function E(·) for two frames of the (128, 64) polar code, in which the R-ABP decoding succeeds while the ABP decoding fails. As mentioned before, the maximum number of iterations is set to N1N2 = 60, thus we count the iteration l from 0 to 59 for simplicity and give E x, Ll, Vl
in Fig. 2 (b). The chosen two frames describe two different error types. In frame 1, the ABP decoding converges to an incorrect polar codeword, but the CRC code can indicate the decoding failure. While in frame 2, the ABP decoding can not converge. In both frames, there are always several errors in MRVNs and E(·) never converges to 0 for the ABP decoding. But in the outer round 3 of the R-ABP decoding, E(·) abruptly decreases from a large value to about 1, and then quickly goes to 0. It indicates that due to the random grouping, some incorrect VNs with high reliabilities can be grouped into the LRVN set.

B. Threshold-and-CRC-Aided ABP Decoding

Since ABP decoding can perform well even on a dense
PCM, we can take partial or entire parity-check equations of
the CRC code into iterative ABP decoding, which improves
error correction performance. For this purpose, we should obtain the whole PCM Hc of a concatenated code. In Sec. II, we have introduced that Hc of a concatenated code with a systematic inner code can be obtained by directly combining H1 and H2. Then, for those concatenated codes with a non-systematic inner code, such as CRC-polar codes, the systematic form of Hc, denoted by Hscys, can be computed by systematizing G1G2.3 Moreover, we find that Hc can also be written as the following form similar to (1):

Hc = -HH–21- ,

(13)

where the (k − k1) × n matrix H1 is derived from H1 (see Appendix A). We can see that in (13), the PCM of the inner code C2 is unchanged. Thus, the computational complexity of

3When C2 is a non-systematic polar code, G2 is an k × n submatrix constructed by k rows corresponding to the active positions of the n × n
generator matrix.

Fig. 2. (a) The FER performance for R-ABP and ABP decoding of the (64, 16), (128, 64), and (128, 96) polar codes. (b) The cost function for R-ABP and ABP decoding of the (128, 64) polar code.
Gaussian eliminations (e.g., the number of binary operations) in ABP decoding will be reduced if H2 is a sparse matrix (e.g., the PCM of an LDPC code, the sparse PCM of a polar code [23]).
When we take the parity-check equations of the CRC code into iterative ABP decoding, its error detection capability will be severely degraded. Although the PCM Hc can check the decoding result, its reliability is not enough especially for short codes. Protecting a part of parity-check equations of the CRC code from participating in ABP decoding is a feasible method to achieve a good tradeoff between the error detection and correction capabilities. When a J-bit CRC code is concatenated, we can keep J − s, 0 ≤ s ≤ J, paritycheck equations of it out of ABP decoding. Thus, we perform ABP decoding on an (n − k + s) × n submatrix Hc of the (n − k + J) × n PCM Hc, which can be obtained by choosing (n − k + s) rows from the bottom of Hc. The remaining J − s parity-check equations in the upper part of Hc are from the CRC code, whether we use Hcsys or Hc given by (13) for decoding. In this way, the ABP decoding on Hc is referred to as the CRC-aided ABP.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: ADAPTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF CRC CONCATENATED NR LDPC AND POLAR CODES

4997

In order to achieve better performance, more CRC
parity-check equations (i.e., a larger parameter s) are expected to be taken into Hc. While, we should also guarantee the error detection ability when an s close to J is chosen, thus
an acceptance criterion based on the so-called ML metric
threshold is proposed for the CRC-aided ABP decoding.
Above all, we introduce a simple definition of the ML
metric. Denoting a received vector and its hard-decision vector over a binary-input AWGN channel as y = (y0, y1, . . . , yn−1) and yH = (y0H , y1H , . . . , ynH−1), respectively. Let vˆ = (vˆ0, vˆ1, . . . , vˆn−1) be an estimated codeword from the decoder. Let Sc denote a position set, where

Sc = i | yiH = vˆi, i = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1 .

(14)

The following definition of the ML metric is given
in [30]. Definition 2 (ML Metric): Given that vˆ, y, yH , and Sc, the
ML metric is denoted by M ∗(y, vˆ) and defined as

Algorithm 3 Threshold and CRC Aided R-ABP (TCA-R-ABP) Algorithm
Input: Hc,Hc,y = (y0, y1, . . . , yn−1), σa, σ, λD2 Output: The decoded information bits 1 Set the inner and outer iteration numbers l1 = l2 = 0, and initialize the LLRs L0 = y; 2 while l2 < N2 do 3 Perform the R-ABP (Algorithm 2) on Hc to get the
hard decisions of this iteration: vˆ = 1 − sgn(Ll1+1) /2;
4 if HcvˆT = 0 and M ∗(y, vˆ) < Mθ∗ then Recover the information bits and terminate ;
5 else if l1 < N1 then l1 = l1 + 1; 6 else l1 = 0, l2 = l2 + 1; 7 end
8 Declare a decoding failure;

M ∗(y, vˆ)

|yi|.

(15)

i∈S c
With Definition 2, an ML decoder outputs a codeword vˆML,

which satisfies

vˆML = arg min M ∗(y, vˆ).

(16)

vˆ

Then, we can define the ML metric threshold Mθ∗, which is an empirical value optimized by simulations. The
threshold-aided ABP decoder will early stop and output the decoding result vˆ if and only if HcvˆT = 0 and M ∗(y, vˆ) < Mθ∗, otherwise the decoder will declare a decoding failure. In the following discussion, we can see that the threshold-aided
ABP decoder finds a codeword within a sphere-like region
related to the received vector. Discussion 1: Given that a received vector y ∈ Rn and
an (n, k) linear code C. Let x = 1 − 2v, v is an arbitrary codeword ∈ C, then the squared Euclidean distance d2 (x, y) between x and y can be written as

n−1
d2 (x, y) = (xi − yi)2 = n+T1+T2+4M ∗(y, v) (17)
i=0

where T1 =

n−1 i=0

yi2

and

T2

=

−2

n−1 i=0

|yi|.

Since

the

threshold-aided decoder can accept v if M ∗(y, v) < Mθ∗,

it is equivalent to only finding codewords in the sphere-like

decoding region S = {v | d2 (x, y) < n+T1 +T2 +4Mθ∗, x = 1 − 2v, v ∈ C, y ∈ Rn}.

By applying the CRC-aided and the threshold-aided tech-

niques to the proposed R-ABP decoding, we call this improved

decoding method threshold-and-CRC-aided (TCA) R-ABP

decoding. The detailed description of the TCA-R-ABP algo-

rithm is given in Algorithm 3.

Remark 3: Unlike the proposed Algorithm 2 and 3, the

original ABP decoding [16] does not early stop. Actually,

the original ABP decoding uses a list to record all the

returned codewords in N1N2 iterations, and finally chooses

the one with the minimum ML metric. The ABP decoding

with a list can be viewed as that N2 decoders work in

parallel, which is similar to the multiple-bases BP decod-
ing [38]. However, we need to take more iterations or imple-
ment more decoders in parallel to realize the list-like ABP
decoding. For controlling the overall decoding complexity,
we introduce the early stopping into the proposed algo-
rithms. Obviously, the list-like ABP decoding can achieve
better FER performance than our ABP decoding with early
stopping.
In TCA-R-ABP decoding, an optimal scheme for the ML
metric threshold can be directly found by simulations, which
evaluate both FER and UER. In order to better control the
UER, the ML metric threshold can be dynamic for different SNRs. When we shrink the decoding region S, it seems that we are pushing the decoding result vˆ to vˆML (if the decoder can output a converged result vˆ). Thus, a suitable small decoding region can filter out many incorrectly converged results generated by the ABP decoder,4 which mainly improves UER. However, if the transmitted codeword v ∈/ S, a TCA-R-ABP decoder must declare a decoding failure. The probability Pr {v ∈/ S} is a lower bound on the FER of a TCAR-ABP decoder, i.e., FER ≥ Pr {v ∈/ S}. This probability can be easily and accurately found via the Monte Carlo simulation, which is affected by the noise variance σ2 and the ML metric threshold Mθ∗. Therefore, before searching an optimal ML threshold by simulations, we can find a rough range Mθ∗ ∈ [Mmin, ∞) which guarantees that Pr {v ∈/ S} is smaller than the target FER at a chosen SNR. Then, we can fine tune Mθ∗ ∈ [Mmin, ∞) via the simulations for FER and UER. In addition, we give an approximation of Pr {v ∈/ S} as follows (see Appendix B):

Pr {v ∈/ S} ≈ 1 − Φ 2Mθ∗ √− nμz

(18)

σz n

where Φ(·) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution, μz = E [|Y | − Y ] and σz2 =

4Due to the structure of the eliminated PCM, an ABP decoder is likely to output the results that are valid codewords.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
TABLE I PARAMETER SETTINGS FOR TCA-R-ABP ALGORITHM

Fig. 3. Pr {v ∈/ S} vs. Mθ∗/n for four rate-1/2 codes at Eb/N0 = 1.5 dB.
Var(|Y | − Y ) = E (|Y | − Y − μz)2 with Y ∼ N (1, σ2). The above Eq. (18) will be accurate when n is relatively large.
Example 2: In this example, we show how to get a rough range for Mθ∗. In Fig. 3, the probability Pr {v ∈/ S} for four rate-1/2 codes with n = 128, 256, 512, 1024 are given. Assuming that the target FER is lower than 0.01 at Eb/N0 = 1.5 dB, we can obtain that Mmin ≈ 11.5, 19.7, 34.8, 63.5 for n = 128, 256, 512, 1024, respectively.
IV. APPLICATIONS TO 5G CHANNEL CODES
In this section, we apply the proposed TCA-R-ABP algorithm to some short LDPC and polar codes defined in the 5G standard. The following decoding algorithms and their shorthand notations will be used. The TCA-R-ABP (N1, N2, s) refers to the proposed decoding algorithm with N1 inner iterations, N2 outer iterations, and s parity-check equations of the CRC code for decoding. The more detailed decoding parameters are given in Table I. In Table I, if a dynamic threshold Mθ∗ is applied (the range [a, b] of the threshold is given in the table), the dynamic value of the threshold for each simulated SNR will be given in the simulation results. For comparison, we also show some performance of the

original ABP(N1, N2) decoding [16] without the assistance of the CRC code, and the simplified TCA-ABP(N1, N2, s) decoding without the proposed random mechanism. The MSA is used for the check-node update in all the ABP-type decoders to reduce their complexity. In addition to TCA-R-ABP, the decoding parameters of the other ABP-type algorithms used for comparison can also be set according to Table I, but some unnecessary parameters should be ignored.
In addition, we also simulate LDPC and polar codes using some well-known algorithms for comparison. For LDPC codes, the scaled MSA is applied and its maximum number of iterations is set to N1N2. For polar codes, the SC [2], (CA-)SCL with a size-η list (denoted by (CA-)SCL(η)) [7], and the LDPC-like BP decoding on a sparse PCM with 200 iterations (denoted by Sparse-BP(200)). In order to be consistent with [23], the SPA is applied for the check-node update in Sparse-BP decoding while the MSA is used for other iterative decoding algorithms. Recently, various SC flip algorithms [34]–[36] have been proposed to improve the CA-SCL decoding. We also consider one of these algorithms, which is called the Chase SCL flip (C-SCLFlip) algorithm [36]. We use C-SCLFlip(η, q) to represent the C-SCLFlip decoding with a size-η list and q flipped bit positions.
For all the simulation results in this section, the BPSK transmission over a binary-input AWGN channel is considered. Since the CRC-aided decoders take the CRC code into error correction, the UER of these decoders should be evaluated. In our simulation, we set the minimum requirement of the UER is 1% of the FER.
A. Applications to Short 5G Polar Codes
The 5G polar codes are mainly employed for the control information and the broadcast channel. For the downlink, a 24-bit CRC code is concatenated. For the uplink, a 6-bit CRC code is used when the payload length is less than 20, otherwise an 11-bit CRC code is employed. In this subsection, we assume that a 24-bit CRC code is concatenated with a polar code.
We first show the simulation result for the widely-used (128, 64) polar code in Fig. 4. We can see that the SC, the Sparse-BP, and the original ABP decoding achieve similar

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: ADAPTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF CRC CONCATENATED NR LDPC AND POLAR CODES

4999

Fig. 4. FER/UER performance of the (128, 64) polar code concatenated with Fig. 5. FER/UER performance of the (128, 96) polar code concatenated with

a 24-bit CRC code.

a 24-bit CRC code.

performances, which are far away from the CA-SCL decoding. Whereas, at the FER of 10−2, the proposed TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 24) and TCA-R-ABP(20, 10, 24) outperform CA-SCL(32) by 0.5 and 0.75 dB, respectively. TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 24) even surpasses C-SCLFlip(32, 3) at the FER larger than 10−3. In addition, we also show the performance of TCA-ABP(20, 3, 24) to highlight the improvement caused by the proposed random mechanism. With the same decoding parameter settings, TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 24) performs much better than TCA-ABP(20, 3, 24) particularly in high-SNR regions. The dynamic scheme of the ML metric threshold is shown near the markers (e.g., the squares and circles) in the figure. In addition, the UER curves for several CRC-aided decoding algorithms are shown in the subfigure, and each is plotted in the same format as the corresponding FER curve. We can see that the UERs satisfy the minimum requirement.
Then we show the simulation results for the (128, 96) polar code in Fig. 5. It is not surprising that the TCA-R-ABP decoding also achieves better performance than CA-SCL(32). For example, TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 24) outperforms CA-SCL(32) and C-SCLFlip(32, 3) by 0.8 dB and 0.5 dB, respectively, at the FER of 10−2. Moreover, in this figure, we provide two TCA-R-ABP decoding schemes that achieve a more strict UER requirement (e.g., 1/1000 of the FER), in which we take less CRC bits or reduce the ML metric threshold.
B. Applications to Short 5G LDPC Codes
In the 5G standard, a 16-bit CRC code is used for LDPC codes with the payload length less than or equal to 3824, otherwise a 24-bit CRC code is attached. In this paper, we only consider short LDPC codes defined by the base graph 2 (BG2) thus a 16-bit CRC code is employed.
The simulation results of the rate-1/2 (144, 72) LDPC code decoded by the MSA, ABP, TCA-ABP, and TCA-R-ABP are shown in Fig. 6. Without the assistance of the CRC, the ABP decoding only performs similarly to the MSA. Nevertheless,

TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 16) outperforms the MSA by 1.3 dB at the FER of 10−2. If we only take 9-bit CRC into iterative decoding, the UER performance will be further improved, as shown by TCA-R-ABP(20, 10, 9). However, we need to increase N2 to make TCA-R-ABP(20, 10, 9) perform closely to TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 16).
Next, we consider two longer LDPC codes of length 256 with rates 3/8 and 3/4. Note that in Fig. 7, we only show the UER of the rate-3/4 code, since the UER of the rate3/8 code is much lower than the minimum requirement. The TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 16) for the rate-3/4 code achieves 0.8 dB performance gain over the MSA, but it no longer performs well for the rate-3/8 code. It can be conjectured that the proposed TCA-R-ABP decoding is more suitable for shorter and higher-rate codes. However, we can directly combine the MSA and the TCA-R-ABP (“MSA & TCA-R-ABP” for short) to improve the performance for such low-rate LDPC codes. The so called MSA & TCA-R-ABP decoding is equivalent to that we use two independent MSA and TCA-R-ABP decoders and then choose the better result. In Fig. 7, we can see that the MSA & TCA-R-ABP can provide 0.3 dB performance gain over the MSA for the rate-3/8 code. By the way, since the ABP decoder includes the BP network of an MSA decoder, it is easy to run the MSA decoding before the TCA-R-ABP decoding.
V. DECODING COMPLEXITY DISCUSSION
We simply measure the computational complexity in terms of the number of real number computations including real number comparisons, additions, and multiplications. The sgn(·) function is a binary operation and can be ignored.
Due to the “random” operations (Gaussian elimination and D2RC) for adapting the PCM, the dense part of the adapted PCM usually has a density of about 50%.5 Therefore, for the TCA-R-ABP decoding using s-bit CRC, the adapted PCM
5In the simulations, we find the density of the dense part may be smaller than 50%, but we can use 50% to evaluate the maximum computational complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

n − k + s LRVNs from n bits. Although checking the threshold-based acceptance criterion needs some real number additions, its complexity can be ignored since the number of additions is small and this step will be executed at most N2 times. Therefore, we can sum up the average computational complexity NABP of the proposed TCA-R-ABP decoder as follows:

NABP = [(n − k + s)(k − s + 4) + n + (n − 1 + k − s)(n − k + s)/2]Iavg. (20)

Fig. 6. FER/UER performance of the (144, 72) LDPC code concatenated with a 16-bit CRC code.

The complexity of the Gaussian elimination which will be carried out in each iteration is not included in (20) since all the computations in the Gaussian elimination are binary operations. However, the Gaussian elimination is a costly unit for hardware implementation particularly for long codes. For short codes, there is some literature that effectively realized the architecture of Gaussian elimination [28], [29]. The implementation in [28] can output fmax/(2n − k) adapted PCM per second with relatively low hardware complexity, where fmax is the maximum achievable clock frequency.
The complexity of the CA-SCL(η) decoder is evaluated in terms of the number of the metric recursive operations and the number of comparisons for the metric sorting. The additions required for calculating the path metric are ignored. In the LLR-based CA-SCL decoding [27], the LLRs are computed by f− and f+ functions, and both functions need only one real number computations under the “minimum” approximation. The metric sorter takes (3η − 1)η/2 real number comparisons to select η paths from 2η paths, where we assume the bubble sort is used. The total number of real number comparisons required for the metric sorter in one decoding trial is about k(3η − 1)η/2. Therefore, the computational complexity NSCL is given by

NSCL = ηn log2 n + k(3η − 1)η/2.

(21)

Fig. 7. FER/UER performance of the rate-3/8 and rate-3/4 LDPC codes both of length 256, and 16-bit CRC codes are concatenated.

used in each iteration consists of a (n − k + s) × (k − s) dense part with average row weight (k − s)/2 and average column weight (n−k +s)/2. The number of real number comparisons required to update a degree-dc check node is dc + log2dc −2, while the number of real number additions required to update
a degree-dv variable node by the reduced-complexity APPbased algorithm is dv [37]. Hence, the number of real number computations of the APP-based decoding is approximately
twice the number of 1-entries in the adapted PCM. Therefore,
the average computational complexity of the message passing
process in TCA-R-ABP decoding is about

2 · (0.5(n − k + s)(k − s) + 2(n − k + s)) Iavg

= (n − k + s)(k − s + 4)Iavg,

(19)

where Iavg is the average number of iterations. In each iteration of TCA-R-ABP decoding, n additions are required for adding the artificial noise and then (n − 1 + k − s)(n − k + s)/2 real number comparisons are required for finding

The complexity of Sparse-BP is also taken into consideration although its performance in the provided simulation results is not good as the CA-SCL and TCA-R-ABP. In our simulations, a 165 × 229 pruned sparse PCM with density ρ = 1.5% is used for the (128, 64) polar code, while a 100 × 196 pruned sparse PCM with density of ρ = 2.16% is used for the (128, 96) polar code. The number of 1-entries in the binary PCM, which is proportional to the computational complexity of BP decoding, is approximately ρ(n − k)n , where n is the number of variable nodes (with some added hidden variable nodes). Using the standard MSA, the computational complexity is about 3ρ(n − k)n [37]. Note that here we evaluate the computational complexity of a Sparse-BP decoder assuming the MSA is applied, while the SPA is actually used in the provided simulation results in order to be consistent with [23]. With an average number Iavg of iterations, the average computational complexity of a Sparse-BP decoder is given by

NSparse−BP = 3ρ(n − k)n Iavg.

(22)

The computational complexity of the (128, 64) and (128, 96) polar codes decoded by the TCA-R-ABP, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: ADAPTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF CRC CONCATENATED NR LDPC AND POLAR CODES

5001

its throughput is limited. Due to this bottleneck in the hardware implementation, the proposed TCA-R-ABP decoding is suitable for ultra-reliable applications only requiring low-tomoderate data rate. Furthermore, the proposed algorithm is undoubtedly effective and practical for soft base stations.

APPENDIX A DERIVATION OF EQ. (13)
Method 1: Consider an inner code C2 with a k ×n generator matrix G2 of full rank k, where k < n. If C2 is a polar code, the generator matrix is

Gn = F⊗t,

F=

10 11

(23)

Fig. 8. The computational complexity of the (128, 64) and (128, 96) polar codes decoded by TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 24), CA-SCL(16/32), and SparseBP(200).
CA-SCL, and the Sparse-BP decoding algorithms are shown in Fig. 8. For both polar codes, TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 24) has a lower complexity than CA-SCL(32) when Eb/N0 ≥ 1.5 dB. Moreover, according to Fig. 4 and 5, TCA-R-ABP (20, 3, 24) also outperforms CA-SCL(32) in terms of FER performance. For instance, TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 24) outperforms CA-SCL(32) by 0.7 dB at the FER of 10−3, while the complexity of TCA-R-ABP(20, 3, 24) is only 3/7 of that of CA-SCL(32).
Since there are many hidden variable nodes in the pruned sparse PCM, the Sparse-BP decoder needs to perform a large number of iterations to recover the soft information of these hidden variable nodes, resulting in relatively high average computational complexity for small SNRs. Whereas, the Sparse-BP decoder has the lowest average computational complexity among three decoding algorithms in high-SNR regions. For the practical implementation of a partially-parallel decoder, the C2V and V2C messages need to be stored in the Sparse-BP decoder, while the TCA-R-ABP decoder with the APP-based MSA removes the storage requirement of all these messages.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the TCA-R-ABP algorithm is proposed to enhance the decoding of CRC concatenated LDPC and polar codes with short blocklength. The proposed algorithm gives a unified decoder for these two types of codes. The simulation results show that TCA-R-ABP decoding outperforms many popular decoding algorithms for CRC-LDPC/polar concatenated codes with short blocklength. Moreover, the complexity discussion indicates that TCA-R-ABP decoding has much lower average computational complexity than CA-SCL(32) decoding for polar codes.
The most significant disadvantage of TCA-R-ABP decoding is that the hardware implementation of a high-throughput Gaussian elimination unit is still difficult by now. In [28], the authors presented a practical hardware implementation of the Gaussian elimination with relatively low complexity, while

where n = 2t and F⊗t denotes the t-th Kronecker power of F.
To make the polar encoding be consistent with the encoding
of a general linear code, we can take k rows with the indices in the active position set A of Gn to form a k × n generator matrix G2. And, the PCM of a polar code is the transpose of the columns corresponding to the frozen positions of Gn. Without loss of generality, we can assume the first k columns of G2 are linearly independent (it can be done by permuting the columns of G2). Then, there exists a k × k nonsingular square matrix P such that

Gs2ys = PG2,

(24)

where the first k columns of Gs2ys form an identity matrix. Then, the encoding process can be rewritten as

v = uG1P−1PG2 = uG1P−1G2sys,

(25)

where u and v are the information bits and the codeword,

respectively. This process can be seen as we use a modified

outer code C1∗ with the systematic inner code C2∗

generator with the

matrix G1P−1 and a generator matrix Gs2ys.

Obviously, G2sysHT2 =

H2 O,

is still where T

the null space of holds for transpose

C2∗ because of and O denotes

a zero matrix. Based on the parity-check equation of the

outer code uG1HT1 = 0, we have the following parity-check equation for the modified outer code C1∗:

uG1P−1PH1T = 0.

(26)

We can see that the modified outer code C1∗ satisfies the above PCM H1PT . Therefore, the PCM Hc of the concatenated code can be expressed as:

Hc =

-H–1–P–T

| –

O --

H2

,

(27)

where O is a zero matrix with size (k − k1) × (n − k). Method 2 (only for polar codes): If we use Gn to encode
an inner polar code, the k-bit outer code should be extended to n bits by filling zeros. Let ϕ (z) (resp. ϕ (Z)) denote the operation to fill a row vector z of length k (resp. matrix Z with k columns) into a zero row vector of length n (resp. zero
matrix with n columns) according to the active bit position set A. For example, n = 8, k = 4, z = (1, 1, 1, 1), and A = {3, 5, 6, 7}, then we have ϕ (z) = (0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5002

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 70, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

The parity check equation of the extended outer code is given by

ϕ (uG1) (ϕ (H1))T = 0.

(28)

Due to Gn = Gn−1, we have

ϕ (uG1) GnGn (ϕ (H1))T = 0,

(29)

where ϕ (uG1) Gn is the concatenated polar code, which
satisfies the corresponding PCM ϕ (H1) GTn from (29). Hence, the PCM Hc of a concatenated polar code is given by

Hc =

-

ϕ –

(–HH–1 )2–G– nT-

-

.

(30)

APPENDIX B DERIVATION OF EQ. (18)

Assume that we transmit the all-zero codeword over a binary-input AWGN channel. Given that the received vector y and the ML metric threshold Mθ∗. The probability that the transmitted codeword v is out of the sphere-like decoding
region is

Pr {v ∈/ S} = Pr = Pr

n−1
(yi − 1)2 ≥ n + T1 + T2 + 4Mθ∗

i=0

(31a)

n−1

n−1

|yi| − yi ≥ 2Mθ∗

(31b)

i=0

i=0

Let Y be the underlying random variable ∼ N (μ, σ2) (here μ = 1), and then yi in the above equation is the realizations of Y . Constructing Zi = |Yi| − Yi, 0 ≤ i < n, where Y0, Y1, . . . , Yn−1 are independent and identically distributed, thus Z0, Z1, . . . , Zn−1 are independent and identically distributed. According to the central limit theorem, we have

lim ni=−0√1 Zi − nμz ∼ N (0, 1)

(32)

n→∞

nσz

where μz = E [|Y | − Y ] and σz2 = Var(|Y | − Y ) = E (|Y | − Y − μz)2 . We can find that

∞

μz =

(|y| − y) fY (y)dy = μ − μ

(33)

−∞

where μ = E [|Y |] is given as follows [39]:

E [|Y |] =

2

σ

e−

μ2 2σ2

+μ

1 − 2Φ

−μ

(34)

π

σ

where Φ(·) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution. Whereas, σz2 may be difficult to be written in a simple form. Alternatively, we can get σz via
the Monte Carlo simulation. Finally, we have

Pr {v ∈/ S} = Pr

n−1
Zi ≥ 2Mθ∗
i=0

≈1−Φ

2Mθ∗ −√ nμz . σz n (35)

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[3] T. Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.
[4] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[6] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[7] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[8] K. Niu and K. Chen, “CRC-aided decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1668–1671, Oct. 2012.
[9] E. Arıkan, “From sequential decoding to channel polarization and back again,” 2019, arXiv:1908.09594.
[10] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[11] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdú, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.
[13] D. Wu, Y. Li, X. Guo, and Y. Sun, “Ordered statistic decoding for short polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1064–1067, Jun. 2016.
[14] M. Jiang, Z. Li, X. Yang, and C. Zhao, “Partial CRC-aided decoding of 5G-NR short codes using reliability information,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 62, no. 8, Aug. 2019, Art. no. 080303.
[15] Y. Urman, G. Mogilevsky, and D. Burshtein, “Efficient belief propagation list ordered statistics decoding of polar codes,” 2021, arXiv:2107.05965.
[16] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of Reed–Solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746–3756, Aug. 2006.
[17] L. Deng et al., “Perturbed adaptive belief propagation decoding for high-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 2065–2079, Apr. 2021.
[18] G. Li, J. Mu, X. Jiao, J. Guo, and X. Liu, “Enhanced belief propagation decoding of polar codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2017, no. 1, pp. 1–9, Feb. 2017.
[19] M. Geiselhart, A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “CRC-aided belief propagation list decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2020, pp. 395–400.
[20] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Decoding low-density parity check codes with normalized APP-based algorithm,” in Proc. GLOBECOM IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 1026–1030.
[21] N. Goela, S. B. Korada, and M. Gastpar, “On LP decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Aug. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[22] K. Niu, K. Chen, J. Lin, and Q. T. Zhang, “Polar codes: Primary concepts and practical decoding algorithms,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 192–203, Jul. 2014.
[23] S. Cammerer, M. Ebada, A. Elkelesh, and S. ten Brink, “Sparse graphs for belief propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2018, pp. 1465–1469.
[24] M. Jang, J. Lee, S.-H. Kim, and K. Yang, “Improving the tradeoff between error correction and detection of concatenated polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 7, pp. 4254–4266, Jul. 2021.
[25] 3rd Generation Partnership pProject; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding (Release 15), Standard 3GPP TS 38.212 V15.5.0, 3GPP, Mar. 2019.
[26] NR Base Station (BS) Radio Transmission and Reception (Release 16), document TSG RAN TS38.104 v16.1.0, 3GPP, Sep. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: ADAPTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING OF CRC CONCATENATED NR LDPC AND POLAR CODES

5003

[27] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, M. B. Parizi, and A. Burg, “LLR-based successive cancellation list decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 63, no. 19, pp. 5165–5179, Oct. 2015.
[28] S. Scholl, C. Stumm, and N. Wehn, “Hardware implementations of Gaussian elimination over GF(2) for channel decoding algorithms,” in Proc. Africon, Sep. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[29] A. Bogdanov and M. C. Mertens, “A parallel hardware architecture for fast Gaussian elimination over GF(2),” in Proc. 14th Annu. IEEE Symp. Field-Program. Custom Comput. Mach., Apr. 2006, pp. 237–248.
[30] T. Kaneko, T. Nishijima, H. Inazumi, and S. Hirasawa, “An efficient maximum-likelihood-decoding algorithm for linear block codes with algebraic decoder,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 320–327, Mar. 1994.
[31] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[32] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[33] Digital Video Broadcasting; Second generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications, Standard ETSI EN 302 307 V1.2.1, Aug. 2009.
[34] Z. Zhang, K. Qin, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, and G. T. Chen, “Progressive bit-flipping decoding of polar codes over layered critical sets,” in Proc. GLOBECOM IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[35] L. Chandesris, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, “Dynamic-SCFlip decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2333–2345, Jun. 2018.
[36] M. Jiang, M. Ruan, C. Zhao, and Y. Sun, “Iterative demodulation and decoding of polar coded BICM with bit-flipping,” Phys. Commun., vol. 35, Aug. 2019, Art. no. 100736.
[37] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[38] T. Hehn, J. Huber, O. Milenkovic, and S. Laendner, “Multiple-bases belief-propagation decoding of high-density cyclic codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 1–8, Jan. 2010.
[39] M. Tsagris, C. Beneki, and H. Hassani, “On the folded normal distribution,” 2014, arXiv:1402.3559.

Mingyang Zhu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in information engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2018, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering. His research interests include mobile communications, optical communications, and error control coding.
Ming Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in communication and information engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1998, 2003, and 2007, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University. His research interests include coding and modulation technology.
Chunming Zhao (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. and M.S. degrees from the Nanjing Institute of Posts and Telecommunications in 1982 and 1984, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Kaiserslautern, Germany, in 1993. He has been a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, where he is currently a Professor and the Vice Director of the Laboratory. He has managed several key projects of Chinese Communications High-Tech Program. His research interests include communication theory, coding/decoding, mobile communications, and VLSI design. He received the First Prize from the National Technique Invention of China in 2011 and the Excellent Researcher Award from the Ministry of Science and Technology, China.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

