2022 IEEE VTS Asia Pacific Wireless Communications Symposium (APWCS) | 978-1-6654-7121-3/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/APWCS55727.2022.9906513

Reliable Transceiver Design of LEO Satellite Communication Systems with Doppler Effect and Multipath and Amplification Nonlinear Distortions

Sheng-Hsuan Hsu Department of
Electrical Engineering Yuan Ze University
135 Yuan-Tung Road, Chung-Li, Taiwan s1070302@mail.yzu.edu.tw

Juinn-Horng Deng Department of
Electrical Engineering Yuan Ze University
135 Yuan-Tung Road, Chung-Li, Taiwan jh.deng@saturn.yzu.edu.tw

Abstract—With the advancement of wireless communication technology, satellite communications have the advantages of wide coverage and low latency. Low-earth-orbit (LEO) satellite communication systems have an important role in 6G technology development in the future. However, high-frequency and highrelative speed lead to Doppler effect, which will seriously affect the performance of the demodulator at the receiver. Meanwhile, for the high transmission power of the antenna, signal distortion caused by the non-linear effect of power amplifier (PA) needs to be considered. In this paper, we use Gaussian Minimum Shift Keying (GMSK) modulation technique as the main transceiver. It is found that under the non-ideal transmission, e.g., Doppler frequency offset and multipath channels effects, the continuous phase modulation (CPM) characteristics can effectively reduce multipath channel interference and nonlinear distortion. Also, the demodulation scheme using cross-coupled detector method can reduce the frequency offset effect. Moreover, the proposed modem scheme combined with the Quasi Cyclic LDPC (QCLDPC) channel coding and the hybrid LDPC soft decoding method proposed herein, the error rate performance has better than using the min-sum algorithm decoding method alone.
Keywords—GMSK, Cross-coupled detector, Doppler, Multipath, PA nonlinear, Hybrid LDPC soft decoding method.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the future of 6G communication system, the three dimension (3D) communication technology will play an important rule, which is the core of low-orbital satellites communication systems [1]. The current 3GPP organization is discussing the possible solution of this technology. In this paper, we study a feasible GMSK technology with crosscoupled detector and QC-LDPC channel codec design. The hybrid LDPC soft decoding technology can successfully overcome the three major problems [2]-[4] of LEO satellites communication systems, i.e., Doppler, multipath, and power amplifier (PA) nonlinear effects. The study technologies will be explained separately in the following sections.
The description of each section is summarized as follows. Section II introduces the GMSK transmission system architecture, including the transceiver design, Saleh’s PA model, QC-LDPC channel encoding, and hybrid decoding. Section III takes 28GHz millimeter wave communication as an example to simulate the performance of GMSK transceiver under different channel environments. Finally, section IV provides a conclusion and future outlook for this paper.

II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE A. TRANSMITTER
GMSK is a continue phase modulation, i.e., the phase of the conversion between two symbols remains continuous. It means that there is high correlation between two transmitted symbols, and there will be no instantaneous frequency changes. The ingredients make the high efficiency of spectrum utilization, while constant envelope guarantees that the signal power is constant [5]. Meanwhile, under the interference with multipath channels, the demodulation signal will not be distorted, which can tolerate multipath channel interference. At the same time, due to the constant power property, signal amplitude will not perform the uneven amplification after signal passing through a nonlinear power amplifier, i.e., inducing distortion of the constellation diagram. For the satellite communication system with high power transmission requirement, GMSK shows good stability under PA nonlinear distortion scenario. The block diagrams of the transmitter system with GMSK modulator and channel encoder are shown in Figures 1 and 2. Next, for the QC-LDPC channel encoding, it makes codeword with the special mathematical structure that can correct error bits and improve the transmission performance [6]. The parity check matrix format of QC-LDPC in the paper refers Table 1.
Figure 1. GMSK modulator.
Figure 2. Transmitter block diagram.

978-1-6654-7121-3/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

140

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

APWCS 2022

Table 1. 802.11n LDPC standard

QAM and GMSK.
Figure 4. Digital Pre-Distortion (DPD) technology with Saleh model block diagram.

(a) DPD output

(b) Saleh model output

B. SALEH MODEL

Saleh model mainly describes the distortion phenomenon caused by PA nonlinear for signal amplification. Satellite communication simulations often use the Saleh’s PA distortion model [7]. The relationship between Sales model and the control factors, i.e., AM/AM and PM/AM, can be represent as following:

′  ~ ⋅ / ⋅ /

(1)

Figure 5. 64-QAM signal with DPD and Saleh model constellation.

when ⁄  、⁄   , and   2.1587、

  4.0033、  1.1517、  9.1040. Comparing the

(a) DPD output

(b) Saleh model output

constellation diagrams of 64-QAM and GMSK in Figure 3, the

64-QAM signal is severely distorted in amplitude and phase Figure 6. GMSK signal with DPD and Saleh model due to nonlinear PA effect. However, due to the continuous constellation.

phase of the GMSK signal, the data is covered in the phase function, and the impact of the nonlinear PA distortion effect is not as serious as 64-QAM, which is amplified by the amplitude of the signal in equal proportion [8]. In order to achieve linear amplification of nonlinear amplifiers, predistortion of the signal before entering the amplifier, digital pre-distortion (DPD) technology is usually used to compensate for nonlinear effects, express as following:

~   ⋅  ⋅ 

(2)

C. RECEIVER
GMSK demodulation using the cross-coupled detector, i.e., multiplying the cross product of the original received signal and the bit-delay received signal, can reduce the influence of frequency offset [5]. The block diagram of receiver system is shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8. In terms of channel coding and decoding, compared with hard and soft decoding, the latter uses the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the probability as a soft value, which can more accurately describe the possibility of

when   ||||⋅、  ∠  ⋅⋅||||. That is, PA effect of the amplitude and phase distortion are compensated by reverse operation and phase reverse rotation, The block diagram and results are shown in Figure 4, Figure 5 and 6.

received bit being 0 or 1. The sum-product algorithm (SPA) and min-sum algorithm (MSA) decoding algorithms both use the probability LLR as a soft reference [6]. By checking the special mathematical structure in the parity check matrix H, the internal information and external information are exchanged, that can correct error bits after error correction.

Figure 3. After Saleh model, constellation diagrams of 64141
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 7. Cross-coupled detector.

(b)

Figure 8. Receiver block diagram.

D. Hybrid LDPC Decoding

This paper proposes a hybrid LDPC soft decoding

technology, which is different from the general LDPC

decoding that uses the SPA or MSA. The hybrid LDPC soft

decoding algorithm performs the decoding process of SPA and

MSA at the same time. Then, we use the concept of weight

proportional distribution to collect the extrinsic information in

a weighted manner. Taking the mixed weight ratio (x, y) as an

example, it means that the recombined MSA external

information

 



100%

and

the

SPA

external

information

 



100%

as

the

total

external

information.

Exchanged

the

intrinsic information to obtain the total LLR can correct the

error bits through decision and check correction iteratively.

The hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm integrates the external

information of SPA and MSA as the reference value of the total

external information. Thus it makes higher error correction

capability than the single MSA decoding algorithm.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS
The 28GHz millimeter wave communication for LEO satellite is assumed to operate in 300Km-600Km above the ground. The movement speeds are about 7500m/s and 15000m/s, which induce Doppler frequency offset being 700KHz and 1400KHz respectively. The system error rate performances are evaluated under the two fading channel secenarios [7][8], e.g., multipath channel [0.5-0.2j, 1+0.4j, 0.6+0.3j] and exponential decay Rician channel [1+0.7866j, 0.6065+0.4771j, 0.3679+0.2894j, 0.2231+0.1755j], respectively.
In this section, we will simulate the four channel environments, e.g., Doppler 700KHz with Multipath, Doppler 1400KHz with Multipath, Doppler 700KHz with Rician fading channel, Doppler 1400KHz with Rician fading. Based on the two simulation results shown in Figure 9, the phase differential waveform of receiver demodulation will not be severe distorted by multipath effect, which only have the difference in amplitude. It is due to the constant envelope property of the GMSK signal.
(a)

Figure 9. Phase differential waveform of GMSK signal. (a). Doppler 700KHz with multipath channel. (b). Doppler 1400KHz with multipath channel.
(a)
② ①
(b)
① ②
Figure 10. The frequency responses of two fading channels under the sampling frequency being 11.2MHz. (a) Multipath channel. (b) Rician channel.
Observing the frequency response of the multipath channel, as shown in Figure 10, it is known that under Doppler 700KHz multipath channel, the frequency response of magnitude is only 0.31dB. Then, for the Doppler 1400KHz multipath channel, the frequency response of magnitude is 2.27dB. Next, under Doppler 700KHz with Rician Fading channel, the frequency response of magnitude reaches 4.23dB. For Doppler 1400KHz under Rician Fading channel, the frequency response of magnitude is 2.11dB. This discussion can be correspond to the GMSK demodulated phase differential waveform under different channels and Doppler frequency offset environment in Figure 9. In the case of Doppler 1400KHz with multipath channel, the amplitude of the phase differential waveform demodulated at the receiver is larger than the case of Doppler 700KHz with multipath; Under the Doppler 700KHz with Rician fading channel, the amplitude of receiver phase differential waveform is significantly large than the Doppler

142
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1400KHz. Therefore, under different channels and Doppler frequency offsets, there will be different bit error rate performance [9] [10].
(a)
Figure 12. Error rate curve of LDPC channel coding combined with GSMK under AWGN channel. (b)

Figure 11. Uncoded GMSK BER curves. (a). Multipath channels. (b). Rician channels.
In Figure 11, we compare the bit error rate performance for uncoded GMSK signal over the different channel conditions and Doppler frequency offsets. It confirms that the crosscoupled detector can reduce the influence of Doppler frequency offset and make the error rate performance without the error floor. In Figure 11(a), for the multipath channel with different Doppler effects, the error rate performance of Doppler 1400KHz is better than Doppler 700KHz. In Figure 11(b), for the Rician fading channel with different Doppler effects, the error rate performance of Doppler 700KHz is better than Doppler 1400KHz. It is proved that under different multipath channel environments, the constant envelope characteristic of GMSK can overcome the multipath effect.
In terms of channel coding technology, QC-LDPC encoding and hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm are used for soft decoding. After different mixed weight ratio simulations, it’s found that under the ideal channel, the hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm with the mixed weight ratio (0.1 0.9) has the best correction ability, as shown in Figure 12. The bit error rate performance is better than SPA decoding algorithm.

Figure 13. Error rate curve of LDPC channel coding combined with GSMK under Doppler frequency offset 700KHz with mulitpath channel.
Under the Doppler frequency offset of 700KHz with multipath channel, as shown in Figure 13, the capability of error correction for hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm with the mixed weight ratio (0.5 0.5) is better than the MSA decoding algorithm. As shown in Figure 14, under the Doppler frequency offset 1400KHz with multipath channel, the capability of error correction for hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm with the mixed weight ratio (0.5 0.5) is also better than the MSA decoding algorithm. As shown in Figure 15, under Doppler frequency offset of 700KHz with Rician fading channel, the capability of error correction for the hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm with the mixed weight ratio (0.4, 0.6) is better than that the SPA decoding algorithm. Under the condition of Doppler frequency offset 1400KHz with Rician fading channel, as shown in Figure 16, the error correction capability of the hybrid LDPC decoding algorithm with the mixed weight ratio (0.5 0.5) is better than using MSA decoding algorithm alone.

143
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 14. Error rate curve of LDPC channel coding combined with GSMK under Doppler frequency offset 1400KHz with Mulitpath channel.
Figure 15. Error rate curve of LDPC channel coding combined with GSMK under Doppler frequency offset 700KHz with Rician Fading channel.
Figure 16. Error rate curve of LDPC channel coding combined with GSMK under Doppler frequency offset 1400KHz with Rician Fading channel.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a GMSK transceiver with cross-coupled detector and hybrid LDPC decoding design is utilized in LEO satellite communication system over the high Doppler, multipath, and amplifier nonlinear distortions. GMSK has the characteristics of constant envelope, which can make high resistance in multipath channel environment. Furthermore, based on the constant envelope property of GMSK, the amplitude of the signal will not be amplified unevenly, resulting in distortion of the constellation diagram. That is, it will be amplified in an equal proportion. It has good stability for the distortion of nonlinear amplifiers, which is an obvious advantage for satellite communications that require highpower to transmission.
Besides, according to the frequency selectivity of different channel frequency responses, the simulation results perform a certain degradation effects on different Doppler frequency offsets. Moreover, for the Doppler frequency offset with multipath channel scenario, using the hybrid LDPC soft decoding method will correct more bit error than using the MSA decoding algorithm alone. In the future, the design of a reliable algorithms and the optimal hybrid LDPC decoding schemes will be studied to overcome satellite interference problems and to make the transceiver with more stable capability.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, R.O.C., under Contract MOST 110-2221-E-155021.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A Vision of 6G Wireless Systems: Applications, Trends, Technologies, and Open Research Problems,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134-142, May 2020.
[2] Y. Zhao, J. S. Cao, and Y. C. Li, “An Improved Timing Synchronization Method for Eliminating Large Doppler Shift in LEO Satellite System,” IEEE 18th International Conference on Communication Technology, pp. 1-5, Jan. 2019.
[3] Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, W. Wei, G. F. Pedersen, and M. Shen, “A Digital Signal Recovery Technique Using DNNs for LEO Satellite Communication Systems,” IEEE Trans. on Industrial Electronics, vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 6141-6151, July 2021.
[4] J. Tong, R. Song, Y. Liu, C Wang, Q. Zhou, W. Wang, “Enhanced Synchronization of 5G integrated Satellite Systems in Multipath Channels,” International Conference on Computer Vision, Image, and Deep Learning, pp. 1-5, Nov. 2020.
[5] R. Mathuranathan Viswanathan, “Digital Modulations using Matlab: Build Simulation Models from Scratch,” Independently Published, 2017.
[6] K. Deergha Rao, “Channel Coding Techniques for Wireless Communications,” Springer, 2015.
[7] Tranter, William H, Shanmugan, K. Sam, Rappaport, Theodore S, Kosbar, Kurt L, “Principles of Communication Systems Simulation With Wireless Applications,” Prentice Hall, 2014.
[8] S. M. El Ghzaoui, A. Hmamou, J. Foshi, and J. Mestoui, “Compensation of Non-linear Distortion Effects in MIMO-OFDM Systems Using Constant Envelope OFDM for 5G Applications,” Journal of Circuits, Systems and Computers, vol. 29, no. 16, 2020.
[9] Zachaeus K. Adeyemo, David O. Aborisade, and Robert O. Abolade, “Performance of GMSK in Mobile Satellite Communication Channel with Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing,” European Journal of Scientific Research, vol. 89, no. 1, pp.32-41, Oct. 2012.
[10] Mohammad Abdul Mobin, Mahmudul Islam, and Md. Saifur Rahman, “Performance Analysis of GMSK and Chirp-Binary Orthogonal Keying in AWGN and Multipath Fading Channels,” 11th International Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (ICECE), December, pp. 1-4, 2020.

144
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

