2022 IEEE 28th International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA) | 978-1-6654-5344-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/RTCSA55878.2022.00018

2022 IEEE 28th International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA)

Exploiting Binary Equilibrium for Efficient LDPC Decoding in 3D NAND Flash

Hsiang-Sen Hsu Department of Computer Science National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan johns1471@gmail.com

Li-Pin Chang Department of Computer Science National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan lpchang@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract—3D NAND flash is prone to bit errors due to severe charge leakage. Modern SSDs adopt LDPC for bit error management, but LDPC can incur a high read latency through iterative adjustment to the reference voltage. Bit scrambling helps reduce inter-cell interference, and with it, ones and zeros equally contribute to raw data. We observed that as bit errors develop, the 0-bit ratio in raw data deviates from 50%. Inspired by this property, we propose a method for fast adjustment to the reference voltage, involving a placement step and a fine-tuning step. Our method uses only a few hundreds of bytes of RAM but improves the average read latency upon existing methods by up to 24%.
Index Terms—Solid-State Disks, NAND Flash, LDPC, Flash Reliability, Read Latency
I. INTRODUCTION
NAND-flash-based Solid State Disks (SSDs) have become a crucial storage component in enterprise servers, personal computers, and even mobile devices. Although conventional hard drives still maintain a lead in the capacity per unit cost, the gap between them is closing up through the deployment of 3D NAND flash with a high cell-bit density.
Reading data from a flash cell involves comparison of the cell threshold voltage (Vth) against a set of pre-defined reference voltages (Vrefs). For example, with the triple-level cell design (TLC), the cell Vth span is divided into eight disjoint segments to represent three logical bits. However, as many cell Vth states are defined, the margin between adjacent Vth states becomes narrow. Interference, such as retention or read/write disturbance, undesirably shifts a cell Vth [8]. Bit errors are created if the Vth of a cell drifts crosses a Vref . The deployment of 3D NAND architectures further exaggerates the interference, because the undesirable migration of electron charge also spreads among vertical layers.
Modern SSDs adopt Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) to manage bit errors of high-density 3D NAND flash. LDPC features dual-mode decoding: With hard decoding, LDPC takes binary bit inputs by placing one single reference voltage, also known as the hard-sensing level, between every two adjacent Vth states. If hard decoding fails, LDPC switches to soft decoding, which involves extra soft-sensing levels surrounding
This work is in part supported by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, with grant numbers MOST 110-2221-E-A49-004 and MOST 1102221-E-A49-029-MY3.

the hard-sensing level to obtain probabilistic likelihood of which program state that a cell Vth might (originally) belong to. Soft decoding is more powerful, but read sensing with extra soft-sensing levels amplifies the read latency.
Ideally, the Vth distributions of two adjacent program states minimally overlap with each other. However, this overlap gradually develops under interference. Placing the Vrefs (the sensing levels) properly is critical to successful LDPC decoding because it not only reduces the error count in hard inputs but also improves the confidence of soft inputs. A brute force approach is to retry flash reading with random Vref placement until LDPC decoding succeeds. The random read retry process can be improved using a pre-configured Vref retry table which stores the most likely Vref choices in the first few entries. If a page succeeds in decoding using a particular Vref choice, the choice is kept and will be reused next time when the page is read again. However, the overhead of the per-page Vref history is not affordable to entry-level SSDs. Downgrading the history information to the block level renders the method less effective, because in 3D NAND architectures, the bit error rates of pages in a block is subject to a high variation.
In commodity SSDs, before a piece of data is physically written to flash, it first goes through bit scrambling and then encoded with LDPC. Bit scrambling aims for distributing Vth states uniformly among flash cells, preventing a high Vth potential between neighbor cells from creating inter-cell interference [4]. Ideally, binary equilibrium, which refers to a balance state between the amounts of 0’s and 1’s, can be observed from the raw data in flash. In other words, among the scrambled raw data bits, zeros should contribute to one half (50%) the total bit count. Interestingly, as bit errors develop under interference, we observed a strong correlation between how high the raw Bit Error Rate (rBER) is and how far the raw Zero Bit Ratio (rZBR) deviates from 50%.
Inspired by this property, we propose a novel read-retry method for efficient LDPC decoding. Recall that rZBR can be obtained from raw data without LDPC decoding. The proposed method involves two major steps: The Vref placement step, which employs a lookup table that maps an rZBR value to an appropriate placement of Vref . If a page fails to decode with this Vref placement, the Vref fine-tune step is involved. The step determines the proper direction (high or low) to approach

2325-1301/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

113

DOI 10.1109/RTCSA55878.2022.00018

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Probability density Probability Density

Vref1 Vref2 Vref3 Vref4 Vref5 Vref6 Vref7

ER(111) P1(110) P2(100) P3(000) P4(010) P5(011) P6(001) P7(101)

Top layer

0Y 1Y 2Y 4Y

Bottom layer

hard sensing level

x

x

(a)

(b)

soft sensing level
Vth x-Δ (c)

Fig. 2. (a) Hard decoding. (b) Soft decoding with misplaced Vrefs. (c) Soft

0

100

200

300

400

500 decoding with appropriate Vrefs.

Vth (logical)

Fig. 1. Cell Vth distribution at the top layer and at the bottom layer of a 3D TLC NAND flash [13].
the optimal Vth placement based on the rZBR differentials and then incrementally adjusts Vref until read decoding succeeds. Our proposal has several advantages: 1) The Vref adjustment is based on how bad the current distortion of Vth states is, 2) it is independent of the layer-to-layer variation in 3D NAND, and 3) it only requires a tiny lookup table of rZBR to Vref .
We conducted a series of experiments under realistic workloads. Results show that our approach reduced the average read latency by 24% and 15% compared with the table-driven read retry using block-level history and that using page-level history, respectively. In addition, while the page-level history for Vref reuse required 32 MB for a 500 GB SSD, our method used less than 1 KB.

ER state is not shown because it was below the logical zero). When the retention time was short, there was a clear margin between neighbor Vth states. As the retention time progressed, the distortion of the Vth states developed and the interstate margins shrunk. Bit errors emerged when the reference voltages Vref1 to Vref7 can no longer well distinguish between Vth states. We observed that first, cell Vth shifted leftward over time due to charge leakage. Second, the distortion of highvoltage states (e.g., P7) was more severe. Third, the Vth state distortion at the bottom layer was more significant, i.e., the variation in rBER among layers was high. This is because in 3D NAND flash, cells are placed along the vertical cylindrical channels. With the current etching process, the cell size shrinks as the channel goes deeper into lower layers. Cells at the bottom layer are prone to retention-induced errors because charge leakage is more severe on smaller cells [9].

II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. Reliability Issues in 3D TLC NAND Flash
NAND flash stores data in cells through electron charge injection. The threshold voltage Vth of a cell reflects the amount of charge in the cell. Reading data from a cell involves comparison of the cell Vth against pre-defined reference voltages Vrefs. Advanced NAND flash stores multiple bits in a cells. For example, Triple-Level Cell (TLC) flash uses seven Vrefs to divide the entire Vth span into eight segments, which sufficiently represent three logical bits, i.e., the least significant bit (LSB), the center significant bit (CSB), and the most significant bit (MSB). In spite of increasing the cellbit density, NAND flash designs are also evolving toward a 3D architecture, of which layers of planar cell structures are stacked vertically for an extremely high storage density.
Flash cells are susceptible to various types of noises, including read/write disturbance and retention [2], [8]: Read/write disturbance undesirably increase the Vth of a cell through unexpected charge injection; the retention effect causes unwanted loss of cell Vth as electron charge escapes from flash cells over time. In addition, Program/Erase (P/E) cycles weaken the physical condition of flash cells, so the accumulation of P/E cycles amplifies the negative effects of disturbance and retention. This study is focused on retention-induced bit errors over P/E cycles as they are the most dominant source of errors in 3D NAND flash [8].
We measured the Vth of cells from a 64-layer 3D chargetrapping TLC NAND flash [13] at 3K P/E cycles and different retention times. Fig. 1 shows seven Vth states P1 to P7 (the

B. LDPC Error Correction and Read Retry
Modern SSDs employ Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) to manage the high bit error rate in 3D TLC NAND flash. LDPC offers (faster) hard decoding and (stronger) soft decoding. Hard decoding takes binary bit inputs for error correction, while soft decoding takes soft input, which reflects the confidence on bit inputs, for probability-based decoding. Fig. 2(a) shows that hard decoding places a hard sensing level (i.e., a Vref ) between two Vth states to determine the binary input of a bit. If hard decoding fails, LDPC proceeds to soft decoding: Fig. 2(b) shows that extra soft sensing levels are used to obtain a value of Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) as the soft input. However, in this example, the two Vth states suffer from retention-induced distortion and the sensing levels do not well distinguish whether a Vth value is from the left Vth state or from the right one. Appropriately adjusting the Vrefs greatly helps LDPC decoding [1]. As shown in 2(c), the sensing levels should be placed near the center of the overlap.
For LDPC decoding, Read Retry (RR) is the process of adjusting Vrefs and attempting to decode data. It is therefore a challenge how Vrefs can be set to a right position in a few steps instead of a long series of trial-and-error steps, because each soft decoding attempt involves the time overhead of voltage sensing and LDPC execution. A de-facto approach of RR is based on a pre-configured table, which contains thirty to fifty entries of Vref values. The table is carefully crafted by NAND flash vendors [12]. During runtime, the SSD firmware assigns the Vrefs according to the table in a top-down manner and performs LDPC decoding until decoding is successful. The

114 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

first few table retries empirically reflect the frequent cases of successful decoding.
To avoid unnecessary retries, the SSD firmware keeps track of the latest successful Vrefs value for each block. Decoding begins with reusing this value, but if decoding fails, it falls back to the top-down table-based RR. We refer to this method as block RR (bRR). However, as previously shown in Fig. 1, the distortion of Vth states among layers appear very different. Reusing the block-level history may not be useful when decoding data of pages from different layers. To cope with the high layer-to-layer rBER variation, page RR (pRR) adopts page-level history for Vref reuse. However, the perpage information is kept in embedded DRAM for fast access, and its space overhead may not be affordable to entry-level SSD models. More importantly, configuration of the retry table is static and it does not reflect any of the runtime conditions such as temperature and device-to-device fabrication variation.
C. Related Work
Retention-induced bit flips are a major source of data error in NAND flash. Cai et al. [2] characterized how retention time affects cell Vths in NAND flash. Over time Vth states become wider and their center shift leftward due to charge leakage. The distortion is in particular severe for Vth states at high voltage levels. Liu et al. [8] analyzed error patterns of 3D Charge-Trapping NAND flash. They showed that 3D NAND flash suffered from the same interference of retention and disturbance as planar NAND flash did. However, vertical layers of 3D NAND were subject to very different degrees of vulnerability to the interference.
When Vth states have developed severe distortion, adjusting Vref helps distinguish Vth values between two neighbor Vth states. A well-known approach is based on a pre-configured table, which contains the most likely choices of Vrefs for successful decoding [12]. However, this method is not aware of how bad the current Vth state distortion is. It walks through the retry table in a top-down manner, and many of the retry attempts may be unnecessary. Cai et al. [2] proposed a background procedure that tests different Vrefs for decoding. The Vref that achieves the minimal number of bit corrections will be kept and reused. However, when rBER is high, successful decoding itself is quite challenging. Rajab et al. [11] and Li et al. [7] both suggested to store a known data pattern in reserved flash spaces. By comparing the known pattern against the raw data retrieved from the reserved spaces, Vrefs can be adjusted accordingly to minimize the difference. However, the reserved spaces cannot store user data and are an overhead.
LDPC features probabilistic decoding using multiple sensing levels. Zhao et al. [14] proposed adding soft sensing levels progressively. When reading a page, the SSD firmware begins with hard decoding first. If the attempt fails, it switches to soft decoding and adds one extra soft sensing level at a time until decoding succeeds. However, this method may experience many ineffective attempts if the current rBER is already very high. Li et al. [6] proposed asymmetric placement of sensing levels surrounding the hard-sensing level. As cell

Vref3

Vref7

retention P3

P7

1

0

1

Fig. 3. MSB page has more 0’s than 1’s over retention time.

Vths gradually drop over time, adding more sensing levels to the left of the central hard-sensing level improves the chance of successful decoding. However, the addition of extra sensing levels is based on estimation of retention error, not based on the real Vth state distortion at the current time.
While this work is also based on progressive LDPC decoding, i.e., hard decoding before soft decoding, our primary goal is to adjust Vrefs adaptively. We will show that the ratio of zero bits in raw data effectively guides the adjustment of Vref s .
III. EFFICIENT READ RETRY FOR LDPC
A. Bit Scrambling and Binary Equilibrium
Modern SSDs employ bit scrambling to mitigate inter-cell interference, which refers to undesirable migration of electron charge between neighbor cells. Before a piece of user data is physically programmed into flash, it is first scrambled using an XOR-based Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR) [5] and then encoded with LDPC. Effectively, bit scrambling uniformly distributes Vth levels among cells and thus avoids a high potential between neighbor cells. When reading from flash memory, the SSD controller should find equal amounts of 1’s and 0’s from the raw data. We refer to this phenomenon as binary equilibrium.
As previously shown in Fig. 1, the MSB value of a cell is 1 if its Vth level is lower than Vref3 (ER/P1/P2) or is higher than Vref7 (P7). Over time, cells lose electron charge and their Vth states shift leftward. MSB flips when the Vth drop across Vref3 or Vref7. It is important to notice that charge leakage is more severe at high Vth states. Fig. 3 illustrates that the shift of P7 is more severe than that of P3, so P7 contributes more MSB flips (from 1 to 0) than P3 does (from 0 to 1). An MSB page will have more zero bits than one bits as time progresses.
Fig. 4 reports rZBR (raw Zero Bit Ratio) and rBER (raw Bit Error Rate) of MSB pages at different retention times and P/E cycles on the NAND flash that we used in Fig. 1. Results show a strong correlation: The more the rZBR deviates from 50%, the higher the rBER is. More importantly, the zero bit count in raw data is available before LDPC decoding. We believe that rZBR is a good index to assist Vref adjustment during LDPC read retry.
B. rZBR-Assisted Vref Placement
The approach to be proposed assumes the presence of a piece of bit-counting hardware. When reading raw data from a flash page, alongside with the data, the zero-bit count of the data is also returned. Now, to read a page, the SSD firmware always begins with the default Vrefs. We call the first read a

115 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

rZBR rBER Prob. Density

0.54

rZBR rBER

0.53

0.52

0.51

0.5

0.1 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02 0
(x,y) x=P/E cycles y=ret. (days)

Fig. 4. rZBR and rBER of MSB pages over P/E cycles and retention times. rZBR is strongly correlated with rBER.

probe read. If a probe read fails to decode, then the Vrefs could have been mis-placed, as previously shown in 1(b). Exploiting the correlation between rZBR and rBER, we propose adopting an rZBR Lookup Table (zLUT), which stores mappings of rZBR to Vrefs. The SSD firmware gets new Vrefs from the zLUT using the rZBR of the probe read and then reads the page again using the new Vrefs.
The preparation of the zLUT is an offline task: In this study, we employed the Vth distribution model presented in [10]. Parameters of this model were tuned based on extensive measurements on the real NAND flash that we used in Fig. 1 under different conditions, including retention times and P/E cycles. Using the tuned model, we simulated Vth state distortion for various conditions, computed the rZBR of probereading a page, and analyzed the recommended Vrefs to reread the page with a minimal rBER. The computed rBER and recommended Vrefs were added to the zLUT.
In rare cases, different conditions share the same rZBR but their recommended Vrefs are slightly different. This is because charge leakage results in both increase and decrease in rZBR and they in part cancel each other out. However, we empirically observe that the recommended Vrefs of such cases are close, so we decide to merge these cases by averaging their recommended Vrefs. A page can still fail to decode using the recommended Vrefs from the zLUT. The SSD firmware proceeds to a Vref fine-tuning procedure, as will be shown in the following sections.
C. Optimal Vref and Its Approximation
Fig. 5 shows an example of the runtime Vth distribution of two neighbor states and a Vref between them. An overlap already developed between the states, i.e., some cell Vths had crossed the Vref and represent erroneous bits. A question is thus where the Vref should be placed to minimize the amount of bit errors. Based on [10], let the two neighbour states Pi and Pi+1 be modeled by Gaussian functions f (v) and g(v), respectively. It has been reported that the optimal placement Vopt is at the cross point of f (v) and g(v) [3]. Modern NAND flash features a special command that counts how many cells on a word line have a Vth lower than a user-defined level. The SSD firmware can profile the Vth distribution (as we did for Fig. 1) and calculate the optimal Vopts. However, profiling a word line involves voltage comparison against 512 levels, so it is not a feasible runtime solution.

f(v) VoptVref g(v)

Pi

Pi+1

Pi Errors Pi+1 Errors f(v) + g(v)
Vth

Vfm+ign Vopt

Fig. 5. Options of the reference voltage between two neighbor states. The shaded areas contain erroneous bits.

Instead of finding Vopt, we propose moving Vref toward a voltage level x such that f (x) + g(x) is the lowest. This voltage level x, referred to as Vfm+ign, is a good approximation to Vopt as shown in the inset of Fig. 5. Provided that functions f and g do not significantly differ from each other in terms of variance, which is basically true for two neighbor Vth states, Vfm+ign will be very close to Vopt. Based on this property, we will present a Vref fine-tuning method in the next section.
D. rZBR-Assisted Vref Fine Tuning
If LDPC decoding fails with the zLUT-recommended Vref , we propose adjusting Vref toward Vfm+ign for read retry. However, as Vfm+ign is not known, a question is toward which direction (increasing or decreasing) should Vref be adjusted. Let Vref adjustment always use the same stepping length. Let rZBR differential, ΔrZBR, be the absolute difference between the rZBRs reported by reading a page using two neighbor Vrefs. As Fig. 6 shows, our idea is to adjust Vref toward the direction in which successive ΔrZBRs show a decrease: R1 is a first read. The SSD firmware performs two more reads R2 and R3 surrounding R1 to get successive ΔrZBRs. Here, because the rZBR differentials show a decrease toward the left, Vfm+ign is expected to be smaller than the Vref of R1. The SSD firmware decrements Vref and continues read retry until LDPC decoding is successful.
An Integrated Procedure. We integrate the Vref placement and Vref fine-tuning into a read-retry process. This process terminates at any time if page decoding is successful. The process begins with a probe read, which involves hard decoding and the default Vraef . If the rZBR reported by the probe read deviates from 50% more than a pre-defined threshold, then the Vth state distortion is considered bad and the procedure switches to soft decoding. Otherwise, the procedure sticks with hard decoding before starting over with soft decoding.
Once the initial decoding mode has been decided, the procedure invokes the placement step: It uses the rZBR reported by the probe read as an index into the zLUT to get a new Vrbef . The page is read again using this new Vrbef for a second decoding attempt. If the attempt fails, the procedure takes the fine-tuning step: It retries to read the page using Vrcef and Vrdef , which are one step lower and one step higher than Vrbef , respectively. Two adjacent ΔrZBRs are computed from the three rZBRs reported by page reading with Vrbef , Vrcef , and Vrdef 1. Recall that the decreasing in the two
1We assume that both reading a page for hard decoding and reading a page for soft decoding report an rZBR.

116 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

R2 R1 R3

ΔrZBR

…

…

∆2 ∆1

Vref

Fig. 6. Determining the direction of Vref fine-tuning based on successive rZBR differentials (ΔrZBRs).

TABLE I SIMULATION PARAMETERS

Parameters Bits per cell Capacity Blocks per chip Pages per block Page size Number of layers

Value 3 (TLC) 512 GB 46749
768 16KB
64

Parameters FTL mapping FTL GC policy Over provision Page read (hard deco.) Page read (soft deco. w/ 2 extra soft levels)

Value page greedy 7% 108us 288us

ΔrZBRs suggests a direction to approach Vfm+ign. The readretry procedure repeats by adjusting Vref toward the same direction, one step at a time, until ΔrZBRs stop decreasing.
The fine-tuning is applied to one reference voltage at a time, e.g., Vref3 and Vref7 are individually tuned for reading an MSB page. If a page fails to decode after all its reference voltages have been tuned, an un-correctable error is reported.
E. Implementation Overhead
Our method employs an essential data structure, i.e., the zLUT. Each zLUT entry is a 3-tuple: (rZBR, Vref displacement, Vref number). All the tuples are indexed by their rZBR field, which is of 4 bytes. The Vref displacement is a signedbyte offset (+127 ∼ −128) relative to the default Vref . The Vref number is of a byte and it indicates which reference voltage (Vref1 ∼ Vref7) the displacement should be applied to. For example, the placement step finds the rZBR of a probe read to be x. It then retrieves (x, α, 3) and (x, β, 7) from the zLUT. For individual Vref placement, α will be applied to Vref3 and β to Vref7. We empirically select 10 unique rZBRs for the zLUT, so the zLUT size is 10×7×(4+1+1)=420 bytes.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
We conducted a series of simulation-driven experiments on the proposed method. Table I shows the parameters of the 3D NAND flash [13] and Flash-Translation Layer (FTL) in our simulation. We adopted the Vth distribution model presented in [10], and the parameters of retention-induced Vth state distortion, layer-to-layer variation, and P/E cycle effect were configured to match our real measurements (see Fig. 1). We referred to [14] for the LDPC decoding capability, i.e., the correctable rBERs of using different soft-sensing levels. We set the P/E cycles of all blocks to 3K, and an experiment run began with retention time of 30, 60, or 120 days. The FTL employed standard page mapping with the greedy policy for garbage collection.
Let our rZBR-based Read-Retry method be referred to as zRR. For comparison, we evaluated bRR and pRR (see

workload src2 0 prn 0 VDI1 VDI2 stg 1 usr 2 web 2 hm 1 usr 0 prxy 1

TABLE II EXPERIMENTAL WORKLOADS

read total 3.12 17.27 69.98 39.37 80.75
436.59 274.33
12.19 39.08 2229.71
GB

write total 23.09 100.65 38.58 7.18 14.10 44.81 1.25 0.72 25.29
1226.35 GB

RaU 22.13 24.94
1.83 0.20 0.35 6.58 0.88 39.19 42.53 52.65
%

oSEQ R. 38.85 58.70 59.88 64.63 98.04 89.39 98.28 25.38 48.41 27.90 %

reR 84.60 77.69 32.16 42.67
1.30 13.26 75.18 98.75 94.43 99.91
%

Section II-B). While bRR reused the Vref setting from the last successful decoding attempt at the block level, pRR reused Vref at the page level. We used the vendor-provided retry table from [13] for bRR and pRR.
Our experiments involved a selection of workloads from the SNIA-IOTTA trace repository. VDI1 and VDI2 in Table II were from the Fujitsu Virtual Desktop Infrastructure workloads and the others were from the MSR Cambridge server workloads. We defined new indexes to better characterize the workloads: 1) The Read after Update (RaU) ratio denotes the proportion of page reads that occurred on a previously updated page. 2) The SEQuential Read on old block (oSEQ R.) ratio is the proportion of page reads that walked through sequential layers of an old block (which was not yet erased). 3) The reRead (reR) ratio is the proportion of page reads that re-read a page.
The primary performance metric is read latency, which reflects how many read retries haven been made to decode a page successfully. We expected that our zRR greatly outperforms the block-level bRR and maintains a reasonable advantage over the page-level pRR.
B. Read Latency
Fig. 7 shows that overall, our zRR improved upon bRR and pRR in terms of the read latency by 24% and 15% on average, respectively. The workloads are classified into three categories for discussion:
Retention-Oriented, Random Read Workloads. Src2 0, prn 0, VDI1, and VDI2 were in this category. Their RaU ratios were low (≤ 25%), so they often read pages of a long retention time. In addition, their reads randomly occurred among layers, as indicated by their relatively lower oSEQ read ratios (≤ 65%). Our zRR consistently outperformed bRR in this category. This is because under a long retention time, the layer-to-layer variation in rBER was high and bRR often failed to reuse its block-level Vref history for random reads. This phenomenon is in particular severe under VDI1 and VDI2 because as indicated by their very low RaU levels (< 2%), almost all reads occurred on data having a long retention time.
Our zRR, surprisingly, surpassed pRR as well. pRR was supposed to perform the best because as it kept the Vref history at the page level. To explain this advantage, Fig. 8 shows breakdowns of the total read time of zRR, pRR, and bRR at 120 days of retention under VDI2: For zRR, read

117 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 9. Average read latency with (a) different shifts to rZBR thresholds and (b) different Vth stepping lengths.

Fig. 7. Read latency of different methods at 30, 60, and 120 days of retention.

retry was often successful with the Vref placement step only, i.e., zLUT lookup. If zRR did proceed to Vref fine-tuning, read retry often succeeded in a few attempts as the finetuning accounted for only 21% of the zRR total read time. As for pRR, although it often successfully re-used the page-level history, 54% of its total read time still came from read retry. This is because when reading a page whose page-level history was not yet available, pRR re-used the block-level history. However, the reuse often failed due to a high rBER variation among layers and in this case, pRR had to walk through the retry table from the first entry.
Retention-Oriented, Sequential Read Workloads. Stg 1, usr 1, and web 2 belonged to this category as their oSEQ read ratios were very high. Because the rBER variation between adjacent layers was small, bRR and pRR often decoded successfully using their history information. Therefore, they shared similar read performance. zRR still slightly outperformed bRR and pRR under stg 1 and usr 1. This is because as bRR and pRR progressed through sufficiently many layers, their Vref reuse failed because the rBER difference between far layers was large. Under web 2, page re-reading was frequent (the reR ratio was high) so pRR performed very well and zRR showed little advantage in this case.
Update-Oriented Workloads. Hm 1, usr 0, and prxy 1 belonged to this category, showing high RaU ratios (≥ 39%), i.e., that a read often referred to a previously updated page.

0.00
zRR pRR bRR

0.25

0.50

0.75

Normalized total read time

1.00 zLUT fine-tune reuse < 20 retries >= 20 retries

Fig. 8. Breakdowns of total read time under the VDI2 workload. zRR involved
zLUT lookup and Vref fine-tuning. bRR and pRR involved Vref reuse and table-driven retry.

Because updated pages had a shorter retention time, reading these pages did not require many read retries. It can be confirmed by that zRR and pRR showed similar performance under these workloads. Our zRR still outperformed bRR under the three workloads because reads were highly random among layers (the oSEQ read ratios were low). This advantage was in particular significant under hm 1, which was the most randomreading one among the three.
C. Sensitivity Study
As mentioned previously in Section III-D, zRR employs two parameters: The rZBR thresholds, which control whether read retry goes for soft decoding directly or stay in hard decoding first; the Vth stepping length, which defines how much Vth changes at each fine-tuning step. We empirically set the rZBR thresholds of LSB, CSB, and MSB pages to 0.561, 0.473 and 0.527, respectively. The three page types use different rZBR thresholds, because their Vrefs are different and retention time affects their rZBRs differently. The Vth stepping length was set to 2. The units for Vth are logical values and their definition is vendor-specific. The highest possible Vth of the NAND flash that we used was 512 [13].
We evaluated zRR with an additional shift to the three existing rZBR thresholds. Fig. 9(a) shows that zRR performed better than pRR and bRR with all the shift values. However, when the thresholds significantly deviated from the existing settings, the read performance of zRR degraded: If the thresholds were too tight, zRR eagerly switched to slow soft decoding but overlooked the chance of fast hard decoding. If the thresholds were too loose, zRR insisted on going through hard decoding first.
Fig. 9(b) shows the evaluation results of zRR using different Vth stepping lengths. Results show that the read latency degraded as the stepping length increased. This is because with a large stepping length, coarse-grained Vref adjustment did not closely move Vref to Vopt. In this case, hard decoding often failed and soft decoding became necessary. On the contrary, with a small stepping length, it took more iterations to adjust Vref incrementally until decoding was successful.
V. CONCLUSION
Modern SSDs employ LDPC to manage the high bit error rate in 3D TLC NAND flash. As the efficacy of LDPC

118 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoding highly depends on the placement of Vref , a common approach walks through a pre-configured Vref table for read retry. In this study, inspired by the property of binary equilibrium, which is a direct result of bit scrambling in standard SSDs, we observed that how much the zero-bit ratio deviates from 50% can reflect the current bit error rate in raw data. With the assistance of the zero-bit ratio, we propose a twostep method of Vref adjustment for read retry, involving a Vref placement step and a Vref fine-tuning step. Unlike existing table-driven methods, our approach adjusts Vref according to how bad the current Vth state distortion is. Our experimental results show that our method significantly outperforms existing table-driven methods in terms of read latency.
REFERENCES
[1] Yu Cai, Saugata Ghose, Erich F Haratsch, Yixin Luo, and Onur Mutlu. Error Characterization, Mitigation, and Recovery in Flash-MemoryBased Solid-State Drives. Proceedings of the IEEE, 105(9):1666–1704, 2017.
[2] Yu Cai, Yixin Luo, Erich F Haratsch, Ken Mai, and Onur Mutlu. Data Retention in MLC NAND Flash Memory: Characterization, Optimization, and Recovery. In 2015 IEEE 21st International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), pages 551–563. IEEE, 2015.
[3] Yu Cai, Gulay Yalcin, Onur Mutlu, Erich F Haratsch, Osman Unsal, Adrian Cristal, and Ken Mai. Neighbor-Cell Assisted Error Correction for MLC NAND Flash Memories. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, 42(1):491–504, 2014.
[4] Jaewon Cha and Sungho Kang. Data Randomization Scheme for Endurance Enhancement and Interference Mitigation of Multilevel Flash Memory Devices. ETRI Journal, 35(1):166–169, 2013.
[5] Jaewook Kwak, Sangjin Lee, Kibin Park, Jinwoo Jeong, and Yong Ho Song. Cosmos+ OpenSSD: Rapid Prototype for Flash Storage Systems. ACM Transactions on Storage (TOS), 16(3):1–35, 2020.
[13] Toshiba. TOSHIBA BiCS3 NAND (TH58TFG9T23BA4C) datasheet, 2019.

[6] Qiao Li, Liang Shi, Chun Jason Xue, Qingfeng Zhuge, and Edwin H-M Sha. Improving LDPC Performance Via Asymmetric Sensing Level Placement on Flash Memory. In 2017 22nd Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), pages 560–565. IEEE, 2017.
[7] Qiao Li, Min Ye, Yufei Cui, Liang Shi, Xiaoqiang Li, and Chun Jason Xue. Sentinel Cells Enabled Fast Read for NAND Flash. In 11th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Storage and File Systems (HotStorage 19), 2019.
[8] Weihua Liu, Fei Wu, Meng Zhang, Yifei Wang, Zhonghai Lu, Xiangfeng Lu, and Changsheng Xie. Characterizing the Reliability and Threshold Voltage Shifting of 3D Charge Trap NAND Flash. In 2019 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pages 312–315. IEEE, 2019.
[9] Yixin Luo, Saugata Ghose, Yu Cai, Erich F Haratsch, and Onur Mutlu. Improving 3D NAND Flash Memory Lifetime by Tolerating Early Retention Loss and Process Variation. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems, 2(3):1–48, 2018.
[10] Yangyang Pan, Guiqiang Dong, Qi Wu, and Tong Zhang. Quasinonvolatile ssd: Trading flash memory nonvolatility to improve storage system performance for enterprise applications. In IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Comp Architecture, pages 1–10. IEEE, 2012.
[11] Mohammed Rajab, Johann-Philipp Thiers, and Ju¨rgen Freudenberger. Read Threshold Calibration for Non-Volatile Flash Memories. In 2019 IEEE 9th International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCEBerlin), pages 109–113. IEEE, 2019.
[12] Oliver Hambrey (Siglead Europe Limited). Intelligent Read Threshold Tracking to Mitigate Read Retry Requests. Flash Memory Summit, 2019.
[14] Kai Zhao, Wenzhe Zhao, Hongbin Sun, Xiaodong Zhang, Nanning Zheng, and Tong Zhang. LDPC-in-SSD: Making Advanced Error Correction Codes Work Effectively in Solid State Drives. In 11th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 13), pages 243–256, 2013.

119 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

