1720

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

Simplified Ordered Statistic Decoding for Short-Length Linear Block Codes

Changhyeon Kim , Dongyun Kam , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Seokki Kim , Giyoon Park , and Youngjoo Lee , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— The ordered statistic decoding (OSD) algorithm for short-length linear block codes provides an attractive ML-approaching performance, expected to be used for the ultra-reliable low latency communication (URLLC) at the next-generation wireless solutions. To find the corrected codeword among numerous candidates, however, the decoding process requires a considerable amount of computational costs, which need to be simplified to achieve low-latency processing. In this letter, we present several schemes that relax the overall complexity of the state-of-the-art segmentation discarding algorithm. Without degrading the error-correcting power, our method approximate the internal steps for computing the segment sizes and the stopping bounds at the run time, reducing the average processing costs by 1.6 × 104 times for achieving the low-BLER performance.
Index Terms— Linear block codes, ordered statistic decoding, ultra-reliable low-latency communications.
I. INTRODUCTION

decoding complexity without degrading the ML-achieving performance [8]–[12]. However, the prior studies are mainly based on the on-the-fly calculations requiring additional complex procedures, still limiting the realization of the ultra-lowlatency OSD hardware.
Starting from the recent segment discarding decoding (SDD) method [12], in this letter, we present a simplified OSD (sOSD) algorithm by removing the compute-intensive steps for checking the size and the validity of the following segment. We first set the hardware-friendly fixed-size segment, leading to the low-resolution processing by removing all the complex operations. Then the lower bound condition of each segment is approximated not to utilize the statistical information. For achieving the target BLER of less than 10−5, as a result, the proposed sOSD approach reduces the average computational complexity of the baseline OSD algorithm by 1.6 × 104 times, allowing the low-cost URLLC ECC solution.

I N THE recent decade, short-length error-correction codes (ECCs) have been gaining in popularity to insure the low-latency data transmission especially for control channels in the wireless specifications [1], machine-to-machine communications [2], and even IoT/biomedical devices [3]. For example, the short-length LDPC code is introduced to support the ultra-reliable low-latency communication (URLLC) in 5G new radio (NR) [4]. The short-length polar code has been standardized at the 5G NR protocol, offering the practical low-latency data transfers [5]. Considering the mission-critical URLLC scenarios, however, the conventional polar codes cannot meet the tight reliability demands with short-length codewords [6]. The ordered statistic decoding (OSD) is considered as a promising solution to this problem, offering the short-length ML-approaching method that can be applied to any kind of linear block codes [7]. To find the correct codewords from numerous candidates during multi-phase decoding steps, however, the conventional OSD algorithm requires huge computational costs, which is impractical to be used in the real system. Therefore, the recent research has relaxed the
Manuscript received 21 March 2022; revised 29 April 2022; accepted 9 May 2022. Date of publication 20 May 2022; date of current version 12 August 2022. This research was supported by Institute for Information & communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant (No.2017-0-00724) and by the Sports Promotion Fund of Seoul Olympic Sports Promotion Foundation from Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was P. Giard. (Corresponding author: Youngjoo Lee.)
Changhyeon Kim, Dongyun Kam, and Youngjoo Lee are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 37673, South Korea (e-mail: youngjoo.lee@postech.ac.kr).
Seokki Kim and Giyoon Park are with the Future Mobile Communication Research Division, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Daejeon 34129, South Korea.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3176646

II. BACKGROUNDS
For the K-bit user information u = (u0, u1, . . . , uK−1), let c = (c0, c1, . . . , cN−1) be an (N, K) linear block code where N denotes the length of codeword including M (= N − K) parity bits, which can be constructed by the given K × N generator matrix G, i.e., c = uG. The received vector r = (r0, r1, . . . , rN−1) suffers from the channel-noise vector n = (n0, n1, . . . , nN−1), i.e., r = c + n, where ni is assumed to follow a normal distribution N (0, N0/2) for the given noise spectral density of N0. The hard-decision received vector y = (y0, y1, . . . , yN−1) is then obtained by setting yi = H(ri), where the function H(·) returns 1 when the input is negative,
and returns 0 otherwise. As reported in [7], the conventional
OSD scheme starts to find the error-free codeword by obtaining the reliability vector a = (α0, α1, . . . , αN−1), where αi is the magnitude of the i-th log-likelihood ratio (LLR), i.e., αi = |logP (ci = 0|ri)/P (ci = 1|ri)|.
With the reliability vector a, for the initialization, we use the first permuting function π1(·), performing a row (or column)level shuffling of input vector (or matrix) in an element (or column) level. More precisely, the π1(a) generates a rearranged vector by sorting elements of a in a descending order. Similarly, we compute π1(G), making the first K columns of the permuted matrix π1(G) correspond to the most reliable columns. As these columns may not be linearly
independent of each other, which is required to increase
the error-correcting power of the following OSD steps [7], we perform the Gaussian elimination on π1(G), finding the K most reliable and linearly independent columns. As shown in [7], the second permutation function π2(·) is then derived for the switching patterns during the Gaussian elimination,

1558-2558 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: SIMPLIFIED ORDERED STATISTIC DECODING FOR SHORT-LENGTH LINEAR BLOCK CODES

1721

finally completing the initialization steps by preparing Gˆ = π2(π1(G)), aˆ = π2(π1(a)), ˆr = π2(π1(r)), and yˆ = π2(π1(y)).
For the main OSD operations, we first perform the Phase-0 reprocessing to obtain the first candidate codeword copt = vˆGˆ , where the hard decision vector vˆ = (vˆ0, vˆ1, . . . , vˆK−1) is defined by vˆi = H(rˆi). The weighted Hamming distance hopt of Phase-0 reprocessing is obtained by comparing the hard-decision received vector yˆ with the regenerated candidate copt. If hopt = 0, we immediately return the error-free codeword copt, and otherwise the iterative Phase-l reprocessing steps are activated to recover the existing errors by gradually increasing the phase number l until we meet the pre-defined maximum phase number lmax. In the l-th phase, we generate the test error pattern (TEP) e whose Hamming weight is l, calculating the local candidate clocal = (vˆ ⊕ e)Gˆ and the local weighted Hamming distance hlocal between yˆ and clocal. If we observe a smaller hlocal than hopt for a certain TEP, then we replace the current candidate, i.e., copt = clocal and hopt = hlocal. After performing lmax phases, the OSD algorithm returns the latest copt as a corrected codeword, achieving a ML-comparable performance by setting lmax = dmin/4, where dmin is the minimum distance defined by the generator matrix G [7].
III. PROPOSED SIMPLIFIED OSD ALGORITHM
As reported in prior studies, for the practical OSD algorithm, it is important to reduce the number of TEPs, directly eliminating the compute-intensive reprocessing steps as much as possible. To set the baseline OSD algorithm, we first modify the original OSD version by adopting the segmentationdiscarding decoding (SDD) method [12], and the early termination scheme with the phase-terminating threshold [10]. Without performing the code-level reprocessing in each phase, the SDD algorithm allows segment-level operations with reduced computational costs, where the size of each segment is repeatedly calculated by using the current decoding information. After performing a segment-level reprocessing, moreover, the discarding condition is evaluated for eliminating the remained segments or even terminating the overall decoding steps [10], [12]. Although we may reduce the number of codeword candidates, however, the baseline processing now necessitates additional overheads to compute the segment bound as well as the discarding/terminating conditions, which are involved with numerous multiplications and divisions [12]. As summarized in Algorithm 1, we newly present a cost-effective sOSD algorithm that basically introduces two computation-relaxed parameters; the fixed segment size and the approximate discarding threshold.
A. Fixed-Sized Segment Construction
In the previous SDD algorithm [12], the segment boundary is repeatedly computed for activating the segment-level reprocessing until we reach the number of maximum segments Q or satisfy the discarding condition. After performing the j-th segment, more precisely, the boundary reliability γj is

Algorithm 1: Proposed sOSD Algorithm

Input: Gˆ , aˆ, ˆy, vˆ

Output: π1−1(π2−1(copt)) Initialize: copt = ˆvGˆ , hopt = aˆ(copt ⊕ yˆ)T

for l = 1 to lmax do

for j = 1 to K/p do

βj = max(0, K − jp)

 Setting the boundary

K −1

e = arg min

ei · αˆi

eβj−1 −1=1 i=0

K −1
hdis = ( ei · αˆi)(1 + ρ
i=0

if hopt < hdis then break

 e: having l errors

N −1 i=K

αˆi/

K −1 i=0

αˆi)

repeat

clocal = (vˆ ⊕ e)Gˆ , hlocal = aˆ(clocal ⊕ yˆ)T

if hlocal < hopt then copt = clocal and hopt = hlocal

end

until e is the last TEP of the j-th segment

end

end

computed to select the size of the next segment, which is originally calculated as follows [12].

γj

=

N λβj

βj i=0

αˆi

N −1 k=0

αˆk

× hˆopt,

(1)

where λ is the user-defined parameter. Then, the boundary index βj+1 is selected as the index of αˆi that minimizes |γj − αˆβj+1|, constructing the (j + 1)-th segment by collecting the next βj+1 − βj reliability values in aˆ. By skipping the redundant segments without performing TEP generations, we can reduce the average decoding time compared to the traditional element-level OSD decoding [7]. However, the previous SDD method still includes a significant amount of computing overheads as we should utilize a number of compute-intensive multiplications and divisions for constructing the next segment as shown in (1). Moreover, it is required to use high-resolution arithmetic units for accurately calculating boundary reliability values, further increasing the processing complexity.
Without calculating the accurate segment size with timeconsuming high-resolution computations, in this work, we set the size of each segment to be p where p is a power of 2. In terms of the computational costs, however, we can totally remove the complicated boundary computations in (1), allowing few redundant TEP generations from the unoptimized segment size. Limiting the segment size to the power of twos also relaxes the segment fetching overheads as it is allowable to align the address for accessing the next segment from on-chip buffers. For decoding (128, 64) codewords, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the decoding performance is gradually approaching that of the original SDD method by increasing the segment size as we can allow more degree of freedom for generating TEPs, even providing better performance than the list-4 successive-cancellation list (SCL) decoding of (128, 64) 5G polar codes [13]. To select the proper segment size, it is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1722

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

Fig. 1. Effects of fixed-size segments in (a) the error-correcting power and Fig. 2. Dynamic range of critical variables for computing (a) the segment (b) the number of TEP generations for decoding (128, 64) codes (lmax = 3). size and (b) the discarding conditions.

required to investigate the trade-off between the number of TEP generations and the error-correcting capability, which is illustrated in Fig. 1(b). As shown in the figure, it is reasonable to use the fixed-size segment of four elements (p = 4) as we can provide almost the same correcting performance for achieving the target BLER of 10−5 as the previous SDD method, still reducing the TEP generation costs by 99.97% compared to the original OSD algorithm.

B. Approximate Discarding Threshold

In the original SDD method, the discarding threshold is utilized to reduce the decoding complexity by skipping the redundant segments without degrading the error-correcting capability [12]. At the end of each segment-level reprocessing, the threshold denoted as hdis is computed as follows.

hdis

=

K −1
(
i=0

ei

·

αˆi)×(1

+

μ σ(aˆ) N

K −

K

N −1 i=K K −1 j=0

αˆi αˆj

),

(2)

where μ denotes the user defined parameter and σ(aˆ) computes the standard deviation of ˆa. If the current weighted Hamming

distance hopt is smaller than hdis, we immediately move to the next phase without performing the remained segments.

Although we can improve the decoding efficiency by ignoring

redundant segments, obtaining the discarding threshold is now

a computational bottleneck due to multiple multiplications and

divisions, especially for getting the statistical information.

As shown in Algorithm 1, in this work, we introduce the

approximate threshold that significantly relaxes the computa-

tional overheads required by every segment-level reprocessing.

More specifically, we introduce the fixed user-defined parameter ρ to approximate ρ  μ σ(ˆa)K/(N − K), simplifying the

equation for computing the discarding threshold as follows.

K −1

N −1 K−1

hdis = ( ei · αˆi)(1 + ρ αˆi/ αˆi)

(3)

i=0

i=K

i=0

Note that the approximate threshold significantly removes complex computations in (2). As the standard deviation σ(aˆ) depends on the channel condition, however, utilizing ρ may affect the overall correcting capability. To find proper ρ,

we carefully consider a specific Eb/N0 condition for achieving the target BLER, and select the hardware-friendly value close to the mean of original μ σ(aˆ)K/(N − K), e.g., ρ = 5.5 for (128, 64) codes targeting the BLER of 10−5. As a result, the proposed approximate hdis uses a similar number of segments to the original SDD method for achieving the same target BLER requirement. We may handle a few more segments in the low-SNR regions. However, the extra costs can be negligible when we consider the complexity reduction by eliminating the on-demand variance calculations in the original algorithm. By limiting ρ to be a hardware-friendly value, moreover, we only perform shift-and-add operations for multiplying ρ in (3), further relaxing the processing costs.
C. Resolution Analysis
As the proposed approach totally eliminates the statistical analysis of the initial reliability vector aˆ, the previous high-resolution arithmetic units are no longer required for realizing our algorithm. For the quantitative analysis, targeting the (128, 64) codewords, Fig. 2 depicts dynamic ranges of three critical variables in the baseline SDD algorithm, γj, hopt, and hdis. Due to the large dynamic range of the previous SDD algorithm, especially for representing small γj value in highSNR regions, as depicted in Fig. 2(a), the decoder hardware with fixed-point arithmetic operators should utilize at least 22 bits for preserving the algorithm-level performance using 32-bit floating-point numbers. By eliminating the computation of γj value with fixed segments, on the other hand, the proposed method now only supports other two variables whose dynamic ranges are illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Note that the minimum value of hopt is also extremely small for high-SNR regions. However, it is less important to precisely represent the small-valued hopt as it is only compared to the discarding condition hdis that has a much larger minimum value. As a result, we can drastically reduce the computing resolution by applying the proposed approximation techniques, e.g., only 7-bit processing is enough to provide the acceptable OSD operations, accordingly expecting the low-complexity and high-speed realization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: SIMPLIFIED ORDERED STATISTIC DECODING FOR SHORT-LENGTH LINEAR BLOCK CODES

1723

D. Complexity Analysis
To show the effectiveness of the proposed cost-efficient approximation schemes, we theoretically analyze the decoding complexity in terms of arithmetic and binary operations, i.e., addition, multiplication, division, and bit-wise exclusive OR, which are denoted as ADD, MUL, DIV, and XOR, respectively. As summarized in Table I, targeting an (N , K) linear block code, the baseline OSD algorithm requires HTB ADDs, and N KTB + N K XORs, where H and TB represent the average Hamming distance of TEPs and the average number of TEPs for the baseline OSD algorithm, respectively. By adopting the previous SDD method [12], the previous SDD approach uses fewer ANDs and XORs by reducing the number of TEPs from TB to TS. However, we also additionally utilize extra computations as shown in Table I, where LS and QS stand for the maximum phase level and the number of activated segments. Note that the proposed sOSD algorithm further relaxes these additional overheads by allowing the simplified segment construction scenarios. By combining the early-stopping criteria [10], moreover, we observe the reduced parameters of T , L, and Q compared with the previous SDD approach, which are denoted as TP, QP, and LP in Table I, respectively. In this analysis, we assume that the value of H is independent of decoding algorithms as it is strongly related to the channel condition. When we consider the worst-case decoding scenario evaluating all the possible TEPs, i.e., TB = TS = TP, three decoding methods require a similar amount of decoding costs caused by the excessive number of TEP evaluations compared with other additional operations. In terms of the average decoding complexity, which is more important in the practical cases [12], it is easily expected that the proposed sOSD algorithm leads to the most cost-efficient decoding procedures by reducing the complexity of TEP evaluations as well as segmentation management.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Algorithm-Level Performance
To validate the proposed sOSD operations, we first tested the error-correcting power of different decoding scenarios targeting (128, 64) and (64, 16) extended BCH (eBCH) codes from [12] as shown in Fig. 3(a) and 3(b), respectively, where the input LLR values are represented with 7 bits. As the original OSD method only requires TEP evaluations without utilizing the statistical information obtained by highresolution operations, we can apply the low-resolution processing of 7 bits to the baseline algorithm while maintaining the BLER performance. Eliminating less-important segment-level reprocessing steps, the previous SDD approach still offers a similar performance to the original OSD method. Due to the large dynamic ranges of internal variables shown in Fig. 2, however, the SDD method should utilize high-resolution computations using more than 22 bits to follow the original OSD scheme, which limits the amount of cost reductions. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 3, the proposed work achieves the comparable error-correcting power to the previous SDD method even we drastically relax the processing costs with aggressive approximations. Removing the usage of extremely

TABLE I COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS
Fig. 3. BLER performance of different OSD algorithms for (a) (128, 64) and (b) (64, 16) eBCH codes.
small values, moreover, the proposed schemes lead to the low-resolution processing without degrading the algorithmlevel performance, utilizing only 7 bits to represent all the internal variables associated with low-complexity operators.
B. Decoding Complexity For the quantitative analysis on the decoding complexity,
we present in this work the concept of normalized complexity considering the actual implementation-level costs. More precisely, as described in Table II, we first equally synthesized all the arithmetic operators by using Synopsys Design Compiler in a 28-nm CMOS technology with a sufficient timing margin, obtaining the number of equivalent 2-input NAND gates to realize each operator. Then, the complexity was normalized to the required costs of a 32-bit floating-point multiplier, which is the most complicated arithmetic unit in this study. By counting the required computations, including OSD initialization steps, we finally calculated the normalized complexity of each decoding method for (128, 64) and (64, 16) eBCH codes, which are illustrated in Fig. 4(a) and 4(b), respectively. To provide fair comparisons, we also estimated the decoding complexity of a list-4 SCL 5G polar decoder adopting the Fast-SSCL-SPC pruning method [13]. For the case of 128-bit codewords, the proposed sOSD approach significantly reduces the computational costs compared with the other OSD-based methods, requiring comparable costs to the pruned SCL polar decoding with 7-bit quantization to achieve a target BLER of 10−5. As shown in Fig. 4(b), note that the proposed work even

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1724

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022

TABLE II NORMALIZED COMPLEXITY OF VARIOUS ARITHMETIC UNITS

decoding complexity of the previous SDD method is now dominated by condition checking operations, clearly showing the motivation of this work. For outlier cases, it is rarely possible to activate more TEP generations than we expected, even requiring all the TEPs at worst, limiting the complexity reduction with the proposed approximate computations. Under the practical channel condition for achieving the target BLER performance, however, the average number of TEPs with the proposed sOSD algorithm is much smaller than that of the baseline OSD. More specifically, as shown in Table III, the proposed optimization schemes reduces the extra costs by 97%, relaxing the overall complexity by 1.6×104 and 11 times compared with the original OSD algorithm and the previous SDD method, respectively, leading to the low-cost short-length OSD-based ECC solution for URLLC systems.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we have proposed several simplification schemes to reduce the decoding complexity of the OSD algorithm without degrading the error-correcting performance. The proposed sOSD algorithm aggressively approximates previous condition-checking steps of the SDD method by eliminating a number of multiplications and divisions. In addition, the computing resolution is significantly reduced by eliminating the small-valued variables, achieving the most cost-efficient decoder realization for future short-length URLLC systems.

Fig. 4. Decoding complexity of different OSD algorithms for (a) (128, 64) eBCH codes and (b) (64, 16) eBCH codes.
TABLE III DETAILED COMPLEXITY FOR DECODING (128, 64) EBCH CODES
requires less hardware costs for supporting shorter codewords of 64 bits due to the reduced TEP evaluation costs.
To highlight our optimization schemes, as shown in Table III, we detailed the decoding costs of OSD-based algorithms for (128, 64) eBCH codes. When the channel condition is relatively poor (Eb/N0 = 1.5dB), due to the excessive number of TEPs, the extra computations for evaluating segment conditions can be ignored as reported in [12]. However, if we consider the practical channel condition of 4.5 dB, the

REFERENCES
[1] Evaluation on Channel Coding Candidates for eMBB Control Channel, 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 #87, document R1-1611109, Reno, NV, USA, Nov. 2016.
[2] P. Schulz et al., “Latency critical IoT applications in 5G: Perspective on the design of radio interface and network architecture,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 70–78, Feb. 2017.
[3] H. Chen et al., “Ultra-reliable low latency cellular networks: Use cases, challenges and approaches,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 119–125, Dec. 2018.
[4] X. Zhou, Z. Ma, L. Li, and M. Xiao, “Low complexity generalizedLDPC decoder based on trellis splicing,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 830–834, Mar. 2021.
[5] C. Condo, “Input-distribution-aware successive cancellation list decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1510–1514, May 2021.
[6] M. Shirvanimoghaddam et al., “Short block-length codes for ultrareliable low latency communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 130–137, Feb. 2019.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1379–1396, Sep. 1995.
[8] W. Jin and M. Fossorier, “Probabilistic sufficient conditions on optimality for reliability based decoding of linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2006, pp. 2235–2239.
[9] Y. Wu and C. N. Hadjicostis, “Soft-decision decoding using ordered recodings on the most reliable basis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 829–836, Feb. 2007.
[10] C. Choi and J. Jeong, “Fast and scalable soft decision decoding of linear block codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1753–1756, Oct. 2019.
[11] C. Yue, M. Shirvanimoghaddam, G. Park, O.-S. Park, B. Vucetic, and Y. Li, “Probability-based ordered-statistics decoding for short block codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1791–1795, Jun. 2021.
[12] C. Yue, M. Shirvanimoghaddam, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic, “Segmentationdiscarding ordered-statistic decoding for linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[13] D. Kam, B. Y. Kong, and Y. Lee, “Low-latency polar decoder using overlapped SCL processing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Jun. 2021, pp. 4860–4864.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

