UI*OUFSOBUJPOBM$POGFSFODFPO%FQFOEBCMF4ZTUFNTBOE5IFJS"QQMJDBUJPOT %4"


2022 9th International Conference on Dependable Systems and Their Applications (DSA) | 978-1-6654-8877-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/DSA56465.2022.00165

A LDPC Decoding Algorithm based on Convolutional Neural Network
Jiamei Gao, Bo Zhang, Bin Wang*, and Yang Liu
School of Communication Engineering , Xi’an University of Science and Technology, Xi’an, China 3104412622@qq.com, 2360424683@qq.com, *wangbin@xust.edu.cn lyang@xust.edu.cn *corresponding author

Abstract—At present, low density parity check code (LDPC) has been widely used in channel coding and decoding because of its excellent performance, but with the increase of code length, the complexity of decoding algorithm has became higher and higher. In view of the limitations of decoding algorithm and the rapid development of artificial intelligence technology, it has great research prospects to solve the above problems through deep neural network. Therefore, this paper mainly focuses on the design and improvement of LDPC decoding process, and proposes an LDPC decoding model based on DenseNet neural network structure, which improves the LPDC decoding performance by optimizing DenseNet neural network structure. This method can recover information at the decoding end, avoiding the limitations of traditional short decoding loop and high complexity of decoding algorithm. The simulation results show that the LDPC decoding algorithm based on DenseNet neural network structure improves the decoding performance.
Keywords-LDPC; deep learning; DenseNet; communication system
I. EXTENDED ABSTRACT
Low density parity check (LDPC) code is a linear block code based on sparse parity check matrix, which has good performance of wireless approaching Shannon limit. The sparsity of LDPC makes the decoding complexity of LDPC [1] code linear with the code length, which makes the application of LDPC long code possible.
In the traditional LDPC coding and decoding, although the randomly constructed LDPC code has excellent performance, it has no deterministic structure, resulting in high coding and decoding complexity, which is not conducive to hardware implementation. To solve this problem, the Quasi Cyclic Low Density Parity Check code (QC-LDPC) [2] can be decoding with less iterations and less complexity. However, with the increase of code length, the amount of matrix operation involved in the test matrix is also gradually huge. Therefore, in the storage of matrix, neural network is introduced to assist in data processing. LDPC decoding algorithms include soft decision decoding algorithm and hard decision decoding algorithm. People are more applied to the soft decision BP [3] algorithm with low complexity. Eliya nachmani [4] and others correspond the Tanner diagram of LDPC code to the neural network and build a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) with LDPC code structure. This method can improve the decoding

performance without increasing the computational complexity.
Based on the above situation, we introduce convolutional neural network into LPDC [5] decoding process by combining communication system with deep learning. According to the performance of constructing special codes, a LDPC decoding algorithm based on convolutional neural network is proposed, which not only reduces the decoding complexity but also improves the decoding performance of the system.
Convolutional neural network CNN is a kind of feedforward neural network with convolution calculation and depth structure. It usually has at least two nonlinear trainable convolution layers, a nonlinear pooling layer and a fully connected layer, with a total of at least five layers. In later development, batch normalization layer and relu layer are usually added between convolution layer and pool layer. The batch normalization layer immediately follows the convolution layer to normalize the activation value and gradient propagation in the network, making the network train a simpler optimization problem. The batch normalization layer is used between the convolution layer and the nonlinear part (such as relu layer) to accelerate the network training and reduce the sensitivity to network initialization.
Firstly, the principle of LDPC soft decision BP decoding algorithm is that messages are iteratively decoding from variable nodes to check nodes along Tanner graph, But its decoding performance is low, And susceptible to the influence of short rings, When there are many short rings in the matrix, Confidence information will be returned to the original node, Affect the independence between messages, This makes it necessary to propose a decoding algorithm based on neural network, The principle of this algorithm is to "expand" the Tanner graph and set the weights at the "edge" of the graph, and use gradient descent method to train. The adverse effects of short rings in the decoding structure are alleviated by adding network weights. The iteration times of this algorithm are relatively small, and the decoding performance is better than the traditional confidence propagation decoding algorithm.
Secondly, the LDPC decoding algorithm based on neural network compensates the short loop in Tanner graph by introducing weight to achieve the best decoding performance. In this paper, DenseNet network is used. Its input is the data after LDPC coding and QPSK modulation through Gaussian white noise channel. DenseNet is used to

¥*&&&



%0*%4"

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

replace the traditional soft decision decoding part. The reason for using convolutional neural network is that its weight sharing network structure not only reduces the complexity of network model, but also reduces the number of weights, which can well deal with the problem of long input code length, And better decoding performance can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 1, it is a decoding flow chart based on neural network.
Densenet the network can maximize the "shortcuts" between the front layer and the back layer, strengthen the information flow between the front layer and the back layer, and alleviate the phenomenon of gradient disappearance to a certain extent. Thus, the neural network can be built very deep. By establishing the dense connections between all the front layers and the back layers, the reuse of features in the channel dimension is realized, which not only slows down the phenomenon of gradient disappearance, It also enables it to achieve better performance than RESNET with fewer parameters and calculations.

Bits

Source Coding

Channel Coding

Modulator

Channel

Bits

Source Decoding

Channel Decoding

Demodulator

Convolution Pooling linear

Input

...

Output

Fig. 1. decoding flow chart based on Neural Network
LDPC decoding algorithm based on neural network has two advantages. Firstly, densenet strengthens the information flow between the front and rear layers through the "short circuit connection" between the front and rear layers, which not only slows down the disappearance of the gradient, but also enables it to achieve better performance with less parameters and calculation. Secondly, with the increase of code length and decoding complexity, the traditional decoding algorithm can not complete all the processing process of information recovery. Because of its stronger gradient flow and less total parameters, densenet network can not only recover the information bit stream, but also get better performance. As shown in Figure 2, the traditional BP decoding algorithm decodes LDPC codes with different code lengths. The decoding performance based on neural network is better than the traditional BP decoding performance.

Fig. 2. Bit error rate curve
According to the simulation diagram in Figure 2, the performance of LDPC decoding algorithm based on neural network is improved compared with the traditional decoding algorithm. With the increase of signal-to-noise ratio, the bit error rate decreases faster. The subsequent work needs to be simulated under more different channel conditions or different neural networks to show the superior performance improvement of deep neural networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U19B2015, in part by the Xi'an University of Science and Technology Teaching and Research Funds under Grant JG18092.
REFERENCES
[1] Y.Kou,S.Lin and M.Fossorier.Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries:Arediscovery and New Results,IEEE Trans Inform heory,Vol.47,No.7,pp.2711-2736,Nov 2001.
[2] A. Mahdi, N. Kanistras and V. Paliouras, "A Multirate Fully Parallel LDPC Encoder for the IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax QC-LDPC Codes Based on Reduced Complexity XOR Trees," in IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 51-64, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TVLSI.2020.3034046.
[3] Y. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Ding, Y. Hu and L. Zhao, "A new LDPC decoding scheme based on BP and Gated Neural Network," 2020 5th International Conference on Information Science, Computer Technology and Transportation (ISCTT), 2020, pp. 346-349, doi: 10.1109/ISCTT51595.2020.00066.
[4] Nachmani E, Be'ery Y, Burshtein D. Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning. 2016 54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication,Control,and Computing (Allerton). IEEE, 2016. 341~346.
[5] K. Zhu and Z. Wu, "Comprehensive Study on CC-LDPC, BC-LDPC and Polar Code," 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW), 2020, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/WCNCW48565.2020.9124897.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

