IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

933

Improving Burst Error Tolerance of LDPC-Centric Coding Systems in Read Channel
Ningde Xie1, Tong Zhang1, and Erich F. Haratsch2
ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA LSI Corporation, Allentown, PA 18109 USA
We report on the use of low-density parity check (LDPC)-centric error correction coding (ECC) for magnetic recording read channel in the presence of significant burst errors. Since an LDPC code by itself is severely vulnerable to burst errors due to its soft-decision probability-based decoding, we focus on LDPC-centric concatenated coding in which LDPC code is used as inner code. To improve the burst error tolerance, we propose a hybrid LDPC-centric concatenated coding strategy in which one inner LDPC codeword is replaced by another codeword with much stronger burst error correction capability. This special inner codeword reveals the burst error location information, which can be leveraged by the inner LDPC code decoding to largely improve the overall robustness to burst errors. Using a hybrid BCH-LDPC/RS concatenated coding system as a test vehicle, we demonstrate a significant performance advantage over its RS-only and LDPC-only counterparts in the presence of three different types of burst errors.
Index Terms—Burst error, LDPC.

I. INTRODUCTION
W ITH the continuous growth of hard disk drive areal density and rotational speed, burst defects are becoming an increasingly crucial issue (e.g., see [1]–[7]). Various burst defects may result in three different types of errors, including (i) write-in burst errors (i.e., a burst of bits are not genuinely recorded on the media), (ii) erasure burst errors (i.e., a burst of read-back signals suffer from significant signal magnitude attenuations), and (iii) excess saturation limit burst errors (i.e., a burst of read-back signals suffer from a significant DC voltage boost). Write-in and erasure burst errors are typically induced by media defects (MDs), track mis-registration, and head fly height fluctuation, while excess saturation limit burst errors are typically induced by thermal asperities (TA) and hence are also referred to as TA burst errors [3], [8], [9]. This paper concerns how to mitigate all these three types of burst errors from the read channel signal processing and coding perspective. In particular, motivated by recent great interest in using low-density parity-check (LDPC) [10]–[14] to improve read channel performance, this paper focuses on read channel with LDPC-centric coding systems. As we will show later, an LDPC-only coding system may not be able to sufficiently handle burst errors if such burst errors cannot be detected/located by preceding read channel signal processing. Although there exist read channel signal processing methods to detect these burst errors in current design practice, this work aims to deal with the problem largely from the coding perspective, which could complement with other methods and further improve the overall hard disk drive burst error tolerance.
To mitigate burst errors in hard disk drives, the essential challenge is how to most reliably and efficiently detect the occurrence and identify the location of bust errors. Given the location information of burst errors, read channel signal processing
Manuscript received April 21, 2009; revised June 22, 2009 and September 06, 2009; accepted September 30, 2009. First published October 13, 2009; current version published February 18, 2010. Corresponding author: N. Xie (e-mail: xien@rpi.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2009.2034012

and coding systems can accordingly mitigate burst errors in rel-

atively straightforward manners. The authors of [15] developed

a method to detect the occurrence of burst errors, which never-

theless cannot locate them. The authors of [4] studied the miti-

gation of erasure and TA burst errors, where erasure burst errors

are identified by analyzing the trellis signal detection output and

the authors assumed that TA burst errors can be identified by

tracking the read-back signal DC voltage in the front-end cir-

cuits. An enhanced erasure burst error detection method is de-

veloped in [5], which can more accurately capture erasure burst

errors through more elegant analysis of precoders and trellis

signal detection output. In summary, prior work mainly focused

on mitigating read-back signal erasure burst errors under cer-

tain combinations of precoders and partial response (PR) tar-

gets, while leaving TA burst errors to read channel front-end

circuits and completely ignoring write-in burst errors.

This paper aims to develop a method that can enable read

channel employing LDPC codes universally mitigate all the

three different types of burst errors without any constraint on

the precoder. Because of the soft-decision probability-based

nature of LDPC code decoding, LDPC-only coding solutions

may not be able to achieve sufficient burst error tolerance,

which will be demonstrated later. Hence, we only consider

LDPC-centric concatenated coding systems in which LDPC

code is used as an inner code. In particular, we focus on con-

catenated BCH-LDPC coding systems. As demonstrated in a

recent study [16], concatenated BCH-LDPC coding tends to

have three main advantages, including (1) it can be much easier

to estimate the error correction performance down to very

low sector error rate (SER) (e.g.,

and below), (2) it can

effectively leverage the bit error number oscillations in case of

inner LDPC code decoding failures to improve the overall error

correction performance, and (3) the silicon implementation cost

can be reduced. However, as pointed out earlier, LDPC code

decoding may suffer from significant performance degradation

in the presence of long burst errors. As a result, LDPC-centric

concatenated coding is also severely sensitive to long burst

errors.

This paper presents a hybrid concatenation approach to im-

prove the burst error tolerance of LDPC-centric concatenated

coding systems. It is motivated by an obvious observation: if

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

the location of burst errors is known, we can easily reduce the

inner LDPC code decoding failure rates by erasing the burst er-

rors (i.e., setting the magnitude of the corresponding soft input

to LDPC code decoder to zero). The basic idea of this proposed

hybrid concatenated coding is simple: In conventional concate-

nated coding, each outer codeword is partitioned into several

equal-sized segments and all the segments are further encoded

by the same inner LDPC code. In contrast, we propose to en-

code one segment using another inner code that has a much

stronger burst error correction capability while still keeping all

the other segments encoded by the same inner LDPC code.

With a much better chance to survive significant burst errors,

that particular segment can readily reveal the location of burst

errors to the other LDPC-coded segments if we interleave all Fig. 1. Encoding data flow chart of the proposed hybrid concatenated coding.

the inner codewords together. We should point out that this hy-

brid concatenation approach is similar to the “picket codes” for optical recording systems [17] in the sense that both use a stronger-than-others code to locate burst errors. While the “picket codes” are not concatenated codes and hence cannot directly employ LDPC codes, this work primarily focuses on

[16] demonstrate the potential of BCH-LDPC concatenation in magnetic recording read channel, however did not take into account of burst errors in the study. It is intuitive that, compared with RS codes that are being predominantly used in

LDPC-centric concatenated coding for hard disk drives.

current practice, LDPC code may (much) more severely suffer

We investigate the effectiveness of this hybrid concatenated coding geared to the emerging 4K-byte sector format by considering all the three different types of burst errors, i.e., write-in burst errors, erasure burst errors, and TA burst errors. Moreover, we develop a signal redetection strategy that can further improve the tolerance to erasure burst errors. Under a representative perpendicular recording read channel, we carried out extensive simulations using hybrid concatenated BCH-LDPC/RS coding, in which one outer BCH codeword is partitioned into eight segments, one segment is encoded by an inner RS code and the other seven segments are encoded by an inner LDPC code. We considered two different overall code rates including 13/14 and 8/9. Moreover, for the purpose of comparison, we considered the LDPC-only and RS-only counterparts under different types of burst errors, and considered the use of the method presented in [5] for LDPC-only coding in the context of erasure burst errors. Simulation results demonstrated noticeable error correction performance advantages of such hybrid concatenated coding over all the other alternatives under both write-in and erasure burst errors. In the context of TA burst errors, LDPC-only option can outperform the proposed method if we assume all the TA burst errors can be perfectly captured by the front-end circuits when using the LDPC-only option. Because such an ideal assumption

from burst errors because of its soft-decision probability-based decoding. Hence, in the presence of significant burst errors, a straightforward LDPC-centric concatenation can become much less attractive for practical applications.
In this work, we propose a hybrid concatenation approach to mitigate the impact of burst errors on LDPC-centric concatenated coding systems. The basic idea is to use an RS code instead of LDPC code to encode one segment, i.e., after we partition one outer codeword into segments, segments are still encoded by the inner LDPC code as in conventional practice, while one segment is encoded by an RS code. By interleaving all the inner codewords, we can take advantage of the strong burst error tolerance of RS codes to locate and erase burst errors in the other inner LDPC codewords, which can greatly reduce the impact of burst errors on the LDPC code decoding performance. Fig. 1 shows the encoding flow of this hybrid concatenation approach. To demonstrate the effectiveness of burst error erasure in LDPC code decoding, we carried out simulations on the decoding of a rate-8/9 512-byte LDPC code, assuming each sector suffers from 100-bit read-back signal erasure burst errors with a signal magnitude attenuation factor of 0.25. Fig. 2 shows the simulated SER performance in case that the burst errors are and

may not be valid in practice and the performance of LDPC-only are not erased. It clearly shows that the LDPC code decoding

coding is significantly worse than the proposed method under the other two types of burst errors, particularly write-in burst errors, it is reasonable to conclude that the proposed method, which can universally mitigate all the three different types of burst errors, is more preferable than the other coding alternatives in the presence of significant burst errors.

performance can be greatly improved if we are able to locate and erase the burst errors.
This naturally motivates us to study the potential of such a hybrid concatenated coding strategy. By simply using one inner RS code with strong burst error tolerance to locate the burst errors for the other inner LDPC codes, this design strategy can im-

II. PROPOSED HYBRID CONCATENATED CODING

prove the overall robustness to burst errors while largely maintaining the advantage of using LDPC codes (e.g., support of iter-

In conventional design practice of LDPC-centric concate- ative read channel detection and decoding, and superior correc-

nated coding, one sector of user data is first encoded by the tion performance for non-burst errors). As a result, the decoding

outer code encoder, then each outer codeword is partitioned into data flow of the proposed hybrid concatenated coding is shown

equal-length segments, and each segment is encoded by the in Fig. 3. We always decode the inner RS code first, and if it is

inner LDPC code encoder. Let

and

denote the successfully decoded, we compare the input and output of the

code rate of the inner LDPC code and outer code, respectively, RS code decoder to identify all the possible burst errors. Due to

the overall code rate

. The authors of the use of bit-by-bit interleaving among all the inner codewords,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: IMPROVING BURST ERROR TOLERANCE OF LDPC-CENTRIC CODING SYSTEMS IN READ CHANNEL

935

and the media jitter noise is modeled as a Gaussian variable

. The parameter

is defined as the pulse width of

the derivative of at half of its peak amplitude. As illustrated

in Fig. 4, the perpendicular recording channel is also disturbed

by a burst error generator that is able to model all the above three

burst errors. The signal is further disturbed by additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN)

. The random samples

with the

distribution are scaled to generate the noises

according to the following SNR definition [18]

Fig. 2. Simulated SER performance of a rate-8/9 512-byte LDPC code in the presence of a 100-bit read-back signal erasure burst errors.

where the signal energy is in the “dibit” response and the noise

reflects the first-order jitter model. The channel output is fol-

lowed by a 10-tap equalizer which equalizes the channel to a

target of

. A 3-tap noise predictor is used to whiten

the colored noise, which is followed by an 8-state SOVA de-

tector for soft-output signal detection. We fix the channel bit

density, which is defined as the ratio PW50/T, as 2.3, and the

total noise consists of 90% media jitter noise and 10% AWGN.

Targeting at 4K-byte user data per sector format, this study

considered two different overall code rates including 13/14 and

8/9. In both cases, each outer BCH codeword is partitioned into

8 segments, and the specific system configurations are described Fig. 3. Decoding data flow chart of the proposed hybrid concatenated coding. as follows.

• Overall code rate of 13/14: The inner RS code is a rate-8/9

we can erase the corresponding soft input in the decoding of all the other inner LDPC codes. Let denote the code rate of the inner RS code, and recall that each outer codeword is partitioned into equal-sized segments, the overall code rate of the hybrid concatenated coding system can be calculated as

(511, 454, 27) RS code over

. The inner LDPC

code is a rate-17/18 (3, 54)-regular quasi-cycle (QC) LDPC

code, where the parity check matrix contains a 3 54 array

of single-weight circulant matrices with size of 82 and all

the circulant matrices are constructed randomly subject to

the 4-cycle free constraint. Since the parity check matrix

(1)

has two redundant rows, we denote this inner LDPC code as rate-17/18 (4428, 4184). Therefore, the codeword length

Let denote the probability that the RS code decoding fails, and denote the probability that the hybrid concatenated code decoding fails even when all the burst errors in inner LDPC codewords have been erased. The code rates of all the component codes, i.e., outer code and inner LDPC and RS codes, should be appropriately determined so that should be slightly less than under target read channel condition, i.e., the RS code is sufficiently strong to ensure enough burst error tolerance without incurring too much code rate penalty.

of the BCH code is

. Given

the overall code rate of 13/14, we have that the informa-

tion length is

.

Clearly, the outer BCH code should be constructed over

, and its maximum correctable error number is

lower bounded by

. By set-

ting

for the worst-case scenario, we have that

the outer BCH code is a (33374, 33052, 20) binary BCH

code. Moreover, for the purpose of comparison, we also

considered both LDPC-only and RS-only coding systems.

with the same code rate of 13/14. For LDPC-only coding

III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
This section presents computer simulations to demonstrate the effectiveness of the above hybrid concatenated coding strategy based upon the system architecture as shown in Fig. 4. The perpendicular recording channel is modeled as

system, we use a rate-13/14 (35616, 33072) QC-LDPC code with the parity check matrix column weight of 4. The code parity check matrix contains a 2 28 array of weight-two circulant matrices, where all the circulant matrices are constructed randomly subject to the 4-cycle free constraint. For RS-only coding system, we use a rate-13/14

(2967, 2755, 105) RS code over

.

• Overall code rate of 8/9: The inner RS code is a rate-4/5

where

(511, 425, 42) RS code over

. The inner LDPC

code is a rate-12/13 (3, 39)-regular quasi-cycle (QC) LDPC

code, where the parity check matrix contains a 3 39 array

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

936

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Fig. 4. Read channel system architecture assumed in this study.

Fig. 5. Simulated SER performance of the rate-13/14 hybrid concatenated coding and RS-only coding in the presence of one segment of (a) 600-bit and (b) 800-bit write-in burst errors.

of single-weight circulant matrices with size of 118 and Fig. 5 shows the simulated SER results when every sector

all the circulant matrices are constructed randomly subject contains one segment of 600-bit and 800-bit write-in burst er-

to the 4-cycle free constraint. Since the parity check ma- rors, respectively, when the overall code rate is 13/14. Firstly,

trix has two redundant rows, we denote this inner LDPC we note that, because the LDPC-only coding system completely

code as rate-12/13 (4602, 4250). With the similar calcula- fails to work in the presence of write-in burst errors according to

tion above, we have that the outer BCH code is a (33575, our simulations, Fig. 5 does not include the SER performance

32722, 53) binary BCH code. We also consider a rate-8/9 curve for the LDPC-only coding system. For the SER perfor-

(36864, 32770) QC-LDPC code with the parity check ma- mance of the proposed hybrid concatenated coding, Fig. 5 shows

trix column weight of 4 and a rate-8/9 (3072, 2731, 169) two curves: one curve corresponds to the SER lower bound as-

RS code over

.

suming the burst errors are perfectly located, and another curve

In all the simulations, LDPC decoding carries out 32 internal shows the SER performance when we use the RS code to es-

iterations and there is no global iteration between signal detector timate the location of the burst errors with inevitable estima-

and LDPC decoder in order to reduce simulation computational tion inaccuracy. The simulated results clearly show that the hy-

complexity. Based upon the above read channel architecture, we brid concatenated coding can achieve good coding gain over its

studied the performance of hybrid concatenated coding in the RS-only counterpart. The results also show that the coding gain

presence of write-in burst errors, read-back signal erasure burst over RS-only approach tends to increase as we increase the burst

errors, and TA burst errors, as elaborated in the remainder of this error length. Finally, we note that, for the hybrid concatenated

section.

coding, the dB gap between the lower bound and the realistic

SER curve tends to reduce as we increase the SNR. This is be-

cause, under higher SNR, we can estimate the position of the

A. Write-In Burst Errors

burst errors more accurately and hence the curve tends to be closer to the lower bound.

Write-in burst errors refer to the failure of genuinely Fig. 6 shows the simulated SER results with the overall

recording the data on the target track. If the write head is code rate of 8/9. As the code rate reduces from 13/14 to 8/9,

off track during the write operation, it can fail to write the the LDPC-only coding scheme becomes much more robust

target track and even accidentally overwrite the data stored to write-in burst errors and hence achieve comparable perfor-

on an adjacent track. Write-in burst errors may also occur if mance with the RS-only coding scheme, as shown in Fig. 6.

the write head flies too high during the write operation. In Meanwhile, we note that the hybrid concatenated coding has

case of write-in burst errors, the read head may read back the even greater performance gain over the RS-only coding system,

previously recorded data or the data intended to be recorded on compared with the rate-13/14 case. Therefore, the results

an adjacent track. Therefore, we model write-in burst errors by suggest that, as we reduce the overall code rate, the hybrid con-

replacing a consecutive segment of data within one sector with catenated coding has a higher gain over its RS-only counterpart

another random data sequence.

but less gain over its LDPC-only counterpart.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: IMPROVING BURST ERROR TOLERANCE OF LDPC-CENTRIC CODING SYSTEMS IN READ CHANNEL

937

Fig. 6. Simulated SER performance of the rate-8/9 hybrid concatenated coding and RS-only coding in the presence of one segment of (a) 600-bit and (b) 800-bit write-in burst errors.

height is so high that a sequence of read signals suffer from

significant magnitude attenuation. Besides, the MD also has

the similar erasure effect on the read-back signal. In this work,

we model erasure burst errors as a segment of read-back sig-

nals attenuated by a constant factor . Hence, the input to the

signal detector in the presence of erasure burst errors will change

from

to

, where

is the interleaved bit stream, is the coefficient of the

ideal equivalent channel, and represents additive white noise.

Clearly, without the knowledge of attenuation factor , the cal-

culated branch metrics may significantly differ from ideal ones,

which may largely degrade the performance of the signal de-

tector and hence the succeeding ECC decoding. Intuitively, if

we can somehow estimate the value of the attenuation factor

, we may be able to reduce the signal detection performance

degradation. Accordingly, we enhance the data flow of this hy-

brid concatenated coding system as shown in Fig. 7, where we

need to address two issues, i.e., how to estimate the attenuation

factor and how to realize the signal redetection.

Fig. 7. Enhanced decoding flow chart of the revised concatenated LDPC and To estimate the attenuation factor , we can apply statistical

BCH coding system with redetection.

estimation based on the principle of minimum mean square error

(MMSE). Define ideal channel output

and let represent the actual input to the signal detector, i.e.,

. Hence, we have a linear system

where is additive white noise. According to the

orthogonal principle, we can estimate using

with MMSE. Although

is readily available, we have to

first estimate the ideal channel output . In this regard, we

Fig. 8. Illustration of trellis branch pruning to reduce signal redetection com- propose to simply treat the inner LDPC code decoding hard de-

putational complexity.

cision output as original channel input , based on which we

can directly calculate

.

B. Erasure Burst Errors

Once we obtain the estimated attenuation factor , we can repeat the signal detection for the data sequence corrupted by

Erasure burst errors refer to magnitude attenuation of read- the burst errors, where we simply take into account of the signal

back signals during read operations. If the read head is off track amplitude attenuation in the branch metric computation. Since

during the read operation, it will read back a weak signal from signal redetection occurs after we have carried out inner LDPC

the target track or even the data from adjacent tracks. Normally, code decoding for the first time, we may leverage those suc-

because of guard band between adjacent tracks, off-track read cessfully decoded inner LDPC codewords to reduce the compu-

heads more likely read back attenuated signal from the target tational complexity and improve the reliability of the redetec-

track. Erasure burst errors also occur when read head flying tion soft output. Recall that each outer BCH codeword is parti-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

938

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

= 0 25 = 0 25 = 0 = 0 Fig. 9. Simulated SER performance of the rate-13/14 hybrid concatenated coding, RS-only coding, and LDPC-only coding in the presence of one segment of
erasure burst errors with (a) 600-bit length,  : , (b) 800-bit length,  : , (c) 600-bit length,  , (d) 800-bit length,  .

tioned into segments. Suppose segments out of segments In case of partial erasure (i.e.,

), simulation results

have been successfully decoded before we invoke signal rede- as shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b) demonstrate about 1.1 dB and 1.3

tection, there are at least bits for every bits are known. Lever- dB gain over RS-only coding when the burst length is 600 and

aging these known bits, we can accordingly prune certain trellis 800, respectively. It outperforms the LDPC-only coding assisted

branches as illustrated in Fig. 8, which shows a four-state trellis with ED by around 1.2 dB and 1.3 dB when the burst length is

with eight-bit input bits stream “xx00x11x”, where “x” denotes 600 and 800, respectively. The LDPC-only coding system has

unknown bits to be detected. With less number of branches, the the worst performance and even fails to work when the burst

computational complexity can be accordingly reduced. More- length reaches 800, which further demonstrates the significant

over, in terms of branch metric calculation, we can also feed the vulnerability of LDPC codes themselves to burst errors. We note

soft output of LDPC code decoding as a priori information to that, as we increase the read channel SNR, the gap between hy-

enhance the signal detection performance.

brid concatenated coding with and without signal redetection

For the purpose of comparison, we also carry out the simu- tends to increase. This is because, at lower SNR the inner LDPC

lation where LDPC-Only coding is used and erasure burst er- code decoding hard decision output contains more bit errors,

rors are detected using the erasure detection (ED) method de- which will directly degrade the accuracy of estimated and

veloped in [5]. All the parameters and configurations are set ex- hence make the signal redetection less effective. A higher SNR

actly same as those in [5]. Accordingly, Fig. 9 shows the simula- will lead to reduced bit errors in inner LDPC code decoding hard

tion results of the three different coding systems in the presence decision output, which will make the estimated more accurate

of erasure burst errors. The attenuation factor

and and hence make the signal redetection more effective.

correspond to partial and full erasure, respectively. We In case of full erasure (i.e.,

), signal redetection will

also consider two different burst error lengths for each attenu- not produce any performance gain and LDPC-only coding com-

ation factor . Similarly, in all cases, we show the ideal lower pletely fails to work, hence Fig. 9(c) and (d) do not show the

bound of SER for the hybrid concatenated coding assuming we the corresponding simulation curves. The results show about 0.5

have a perfect knowledge of burst error location and attenuation dB and 0.7 dB gain over RS-only coding when the burst length

factor . Moreover, we also show the SER performance of the is 600 and 800, respectively. Compared with the LDPC-only

hybrid concatenated coding when signal redetection is enabled coding system assisted with ED, the proposed hybrid concate-

and disabled (note that, when signal redetection is disabled, we nated coding achieves 0.6 dB and 0.8 dB gain when the burst

simply erase the soft input to LDPC code decoders at the iden- length is 600 and 800, respectively. Clearly, the above simula-

tified burst error locations).

tion results show that the proposed hybrid concatenated coding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: IMPROVING BURST ERROR TOLERANCE OF LDPC-CENTRIC CODING SYSTEMS IN READ CHANNEL

939

= 0 25 = 0 25 = 0 = 0 Fig. 10. Simulated SER performance of the rate-8/9 hybrid concatenated coding, RS-only coding, and LDPC-only coding in the presence of one segment of
erasure burst errors with (a) 600-bit length,  : , (b) 800-bit length,  : , (c) 600-bit length,  , (d) 800-bit length,  .

strategy can achieve very good gain in the presence of read-back

signal erasure burst errors.

We repeated the same simulations for the case of overall code

rate of 8/9. Fig. 10 shows the simulation results, from which

similar conclusions can be drawn with respect to the comparison

among different coding schemes and the advantages of the pro-

posed hybrid concatenated coding scheme. Moreover, by com-

paring Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, we can observe how overall code rates

may impact the effectiveness of different coding schemes. From

Fig. 9(a), (b) and Fig. 10(a), (b) in case

, we can see

that, as the overall code rate reduces, the hybrid concatenated

coding scheme tends to realize a higher gain over its RS-only

counterpart. Meanwhile, compared with the other two schemes,

the LDPC-only coding scheme tends to benefit most as we re-

duce the overall code rate. Similar conclusion can be derived

from Fig. 9(c), (d) and Fig. 10(c), (d) in case

.

C. TA Burst Errors

assuming the burst errors are perfectly located and the SER performance when we use the RS code to estimate the location of the burst errors with inevitable estimation inaccuracy. In case of LDPC-only coding, we assume that the TA burst errors can be perfectly identified using read channel front-end circuits, and are subsequently erased. Under such an ideal but apparently unfeasible assumption, LDPC-coding can achieve the best performance as shown in Fig. 11. Fig. 12 shows the results of rate-8/9 case, which again shows that LDPC-only coding scheme tends to benefit most from overall code rate reduction.
Based upon the above performance evaluation and comparison under write-in, erasure, and TA burst errors, we may conclude that the proposed hybrid concatenated coding strategy appears to be the most preferable option that can very well accommodate all these three types of burst errors. Moreover, this proposed design strategy does not demand any assistance from front-end circuits, certain types of precoder and analysis of trellis signal detection output, which can largely simplify the overall read channel design.

As elaborated in [4], TA burst errors are modeled by overwriting the equalized signal with the peak amplitude of the isolated pulse. In this work, we assume that the location of TA burst errors changes randomly sector by sector. Fig. 11 shows the simulated SER results when every sector contains one segment of 600-bit and 800-bit TA burst errors, respectively. For overall code rate of 13/14, Fig. 11 shows both the SER lower bound

D. Performance Comparison in the Absence of Burst Errors
In this section, we study the performance of various coding options when burst errors are not considered. With the exactly same configurations as above, we carry out simulations for LDPC-only, RS-only and the proposed hybrid concatenated coding system without considering any burst errors. Moreover,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

940

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 46, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Fig. 11. Simulated SER performance of the rate-13/14 hybrid concatenated coding, RS-only coding and LDPC-only coding with perfect erasure in the presence of one segment of (a) 600-bit and (b) 800-bit TA burst errors.

Fig. 12. Simulated SER performance of the rate-8/9 hybrid concatenated coding, RS-only coding and LDPC-only coding with perfect erasure in the presence of one segment of (a) 600-bit and (b) 800-bit TA burst errors.

we further run simulation for regular BCH-LDPC concatenated

coding, i.e., each outer BCH codeword is partitioned into 8

segments all of which are encoded by the same rate-17/18 inner

LDPC code. Hence, in the context of BCH-LDPC concatena-

tion, the outer BCH code is able to correct up to 36 bit errors.

We note that, except RS-only coding, we carried out up to 4

detection/decoding iterations for the other three coding options.

Fig. 13 shows the simulation results. As we could expect, the

LDPC-only coding can achieve the best performance as well

as the sharpest waterfall when burst errors are not considered.

Meanwhile, because of the big code rate loss due the use of RS

inner code for burst error detection, the hybrid concatenated

coding can only achieve a performance similar to RS-only

coding.

Fig. 13. Comparison of different coding systems without burst errors.

Finally, we note that, although this work did not quantita-

tively investigate and evaluate the silicon implementation of

the proposed hybrid concatenated coding scheme and the com- source demanding. It is well known that the computational com-

parison with other competing coding schemes, it is worthy to plexity of RS and BCH decoding is quadratically proportional

qualitatively discuss the hardware implementation issue. First to . Since the RS and BCH codes used in this hybrid concate-

of all, it should be pointed out that, compared with its RS-only nated coding scheme do not have a big value of , particularly

or LDPC-only counterparts, although the hybrid concatenated compared with the RS-only coding scheme, their decoder imple-

coding scheme demands the silicon implementation of three mentation complexities can be relatively very small. The silicon

different types of decoders, each decoder can be much less re- complexity of LDPC decoders is proportional to the code length.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: IMPROVING BURST ERROR TOLERANCE OF LDPC-CENTRIC CODING SYSTEMS IN READ CHANNEL

941

As a result, the silicon overhead of the inner LDPC code decoder in the hybrid concatenated coding can be much less than that of a 4KB LDPC code decoder in LDPC-only scheme. Therefore, although this proposed hybrid concatenated coding scheme demands three different decoders, its overall silicon implementation complexity is not necessarily higher than other competing solutions. Meanwhile, it should be pointed out that, from the system design and verification point view, the proposed hybrid concatenated coding scheme is certainly more demanding than the other single-code schemes.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a hybrid LDPC-centric concatenated coding design strategy that can achieve strong robustness to various burst errors in magnetic recording read channel. The key idea is to replace one inner LDPC code with another inner code such as RS code with much better burst error correction capability. This particular inner code can reveal the burst error location information to the other inner LDPC codewords, which enables the use of soft input erasure to largely improve inner LDPC code decoding performance in the presence of significant burst errors. A signal redetection approach is developed to further improve the hybrid LDPC-centric concatenated coding performance in the presence of erasure burst errors. Using a hybrid concatenated BCH-LDPC/RS coding design as an example, we carried out simulations under three different types of burst errors, including write-in, erasure and TA burst errors. Results demonstrate the advantages of this proposed design solution over both RS-only and LDPC-only solutions. We believe such hybrid LDPC-centric coding provides an attractive option to readily leverage the appealing advantages of LDPC code and meanwhile well mitigate its burst error vulnerability in practical magnetic recording applications.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Date and M. Shimokoshi, “Magnetic Disk Drive and Read/Write Method to Reduce Read Error Rate,” U.S. Patent 7 369 351, May 6, 2008.

[2] R. Wood, “Future hard disk drive systems,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 321, pp. 555–561, 2008.
[3] J. Elerath, “Hard disk drives: The good, the bad and the ugly!,” ACM Queue, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 28–37, Sept. 2007.
[4] T. Morita, Y. Sato, and T. Sugawara, “ECC-less LDPC coding for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pt. 1, pp. 2304–2306, Sep. 2002.
[5] W. Tan, H. Xia, and J. Cruz, “Erasure detection algorithms for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pt. 2, pp. 3099–3101, Jul. 2004.
[6] S. Lee, “Method of Managing Defects in Hard Disk Drive, Recording Media Therefor and Hard Disk Drive Therefor,” U.S. Patent 7 245 445, Jul. 17, 2007.
[7] S. Gurumurthi, A. Sivasubramaniam, and V. Natarajan, “Disk drive roadmap from the thermal perspective: A case for dynamic thermal management,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Int. Symp. Computer Architecture, Washington, DC, 2005, pp. 38–49, IEEE Computer Society.
[8] S. Stupp, M. Baldwinson, P. McEwen, T. Crawford, and C. Rogers, “Thermal asperity trends,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 35, no. 2, pt. 1, pp. 752–757, Mar. 1999.
[9] B. Vasic, Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2005.
[10] W. Tan, “Design of inner LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 1, pt. 2, pp. 217–222, Jan. 2008.
[11] X. Hu, B. Kumar, Z. Li, and R. Barndt, “Error floor estimation of long LDPC codes on partial response channels,” in Proc. Global Telecommunications Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2007, pp. 259–264.
[12] X. Hu and B. Kumar, “Evaluation of low-density parity-check codes on perpendicular magnetic recording model,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 727–732, Feb. 2007.
[13] H. Song and J. R. Cruz, “Reduced-complexity decoding of Q-ary LDPC codes for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 1081–1087, Mar. 2003.
[14] H. Song, T. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, “Applications of low-density parity-check codes to magnetic recording channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 918–923, May 2001.
[15] M. Kaynak, T. Duman, and E. Kurtas, “Burst error identification for turbo and LDPC coded systems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, 2003, pp. 515–518.
[16] N. Xie, W. Xu, T. Zhang, E. F. Haratsch, and J. Moon, “Concatenated LDPC and BCH coding system for magnetic recording read channel with 4K-byte sector format,” IEEE Trans. Magn., to be published.
[17] W. Coene, H. Pozidis, M. Van Dijk, J. Kahlman, R. Van Woudenberg, and B. Stek, “Channel coding and signal processing for optical recording systems beyond DVD,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pt. 1, pp. 682–688, Mar. 2001.
[18] J. Moon, “SNR definition for magnetic recording channels with transition noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 3881–3883, Sep. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

