482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Design of High-Throughput Fully Parallel LDPC Decoders Based on Wire Partitioning
Naoya Onizawa, Student Member, IEEE, Takahiro Hanyu, Member, IEEE, and Vincent C. Gaudet, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We present a method to design high-throughput

fully parallel low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders. With

our method, a decoder’s longest wires are divided into several

short wires with pipeline registers. Log-likelihood ratio messages

transmitted along with these pipelined paths are thus sent over

multiple clock cycles, and the decoder’s critical path delay can

be reduced while maintaining comparable bit error rate perfor-

mance. The number of registers inserted into paths is estimated

by using wiring information extracted from initial placement

and routing information with a conventional LDPC decoder, and

thus only necessary registers are inserted. Also, by inserting an

even number of registers into the longer wires, two different

codewords can be simultaneously decoded, which improves the

throughput at a small penalty in area. We present our design flow

as well as post-layout simulation results for several versions of a

length-1024, (3,6)-regular LDPC code. Using our technique, we

= achieve a maximum uncoded throughput of 13.21 Gb/s with an

energy consumption of 0.098 nJ per uncoded bit at

05

dB. This represents a 28% increase in throughput, a 30% decrease

in energy per bit, and a 1.6% increase in core area with respect

to a conventional parallel LDPC decoder, using a 90-nm CMOS

technology.

Index Terms—Forward error control (FEC), iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, VLSI.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are a type of capacity-approaching forward error control code that has been incorporated into many recent digital communication standards such as IEEE 802.16e [2] and 802.3an [3]. Designing LDPC decoder integrated circuits that operate at the throughputs required by these standards and with reasonable power consumption is challenging. Many integrated circuit designs have been reported in [4]–[19]. These can be generally classified as memory-based [6]–[14], where computations are performed serially, or as fully parallel [15]–[19], where the parallelism inherent in LDPC decoding algorithms is exploited. Fully parallel implementations require very complex routing that often limits the logic utilization and maximum clock speed of decoders,
Manuscript received July 29, 2008; revised October 18, 2008. First published April 14, 2009; current version published February 24, 2010. This work was supported by the VLSI Design and Education Center (VDEC), University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in collaboration with Synopsys, Inc.
N. Onizawa and T. Hanyu are with the Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8576, Japan (e-mail: onizawa@ngc. riec.tohoku.ac.jp; hanyu@ngc.riec.tohoku.ac.jp).
V. C. Gaudet is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4, Canada (e-mail: vgaudet@ece. ualberta.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2008.2011360

which causes low decoding throughput [15]. Bit-serial implementations [16]–[18], where messages are transmitted bit-serially between computation nodes, have also been reported as a way to reduce routing complexity for improving the clock frequency, but the number of clock cycles required to transmit one message is increased, resulting in low decoding throughput.
In this paper, we present a design methodology for fully parallel LDPC decoders that is based on partitioning long wires into multiple segments. Registers are inserted into the longer wires, and messages along those wires are transmitted over more than one clock cycle. Node computations are performed by using the most recent available (albeit potentially outdated) messages, rather than waiting for all messages to arrive such as in conventional flooding schedules [15]. Therefore, the worst-case wiring delay is reduced. Although this schedule occasionally results in using outdated messages, this is not noticeably detrimental to the decoding algorithm, and has been exploited before, for example in [22]. Therefore, a decoder’s throughput can be increased while maintaining acceptable bit error rate (BER) performance.
This paper is an extension of work previously reported in [19]. In our initial work, since registers that divide long wires were inserted based on pre-place-and-route estimates of wire lengths, a large number of registers was inserted, leading to comparatively high power consumption, and limited throughput. We have since updated our design flow to conduct an initial place-and-route phase without extra registers, that is used to generate a list of candidate wires for register insertion. Since the initial layout is generated without restrictions on the placement of nodes, the number of longer wires is reduced. Therefore, by using actual wiring information extracted from the initial layout, the number of registers can be reduced in comparison with that of our previous design flow, which results in lowered clocking power and fewer clock cycles for equivalent BER performance.
Moreover, in our initial work, a single register was inserted into longer wires, and thus, two different codewords could not be decoded simultaneously. Therefore, in this work two (or an even number of) registers are inserted into the longer wires. Since the two different messages are not mixed by inserting the two registers into the longer wires, the two codewords can be simultaneously decoded, which can improve the throughput at small penalty in area.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews LDPC codes and our scheduling algorithm based on wire partitioning. Section III describes our design flow. Section IV describes our simulation results. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.

1063-8210/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:17:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: DESIGN OF HIGH-THROUGHPUT FULLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODERS

483

II. FLOODING-TYPE UPDATED SCHEDULING ALGORITHM BASED ON WIRE PARTITIONING

A. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes and Decoding Algorithms
LDPC decoding is usually performed using message-passing algorithms [20] such as the sum–product algorithm or one of its variants the min-sum algorithm [21]. LDPC codes can be represented graphically by a bipartite graph known as a factor graph [20]. Message-passing algorithms typically use the factor graph as a dataflow diagram on which messages that represent a posteriori probabilities (or log-likelihood ratios (LLRs), in the logarithmic domain) are iteratively sent, until the decoder converges or until a prespecified number of iterations has been reached. A factor graph contains two types of nodes: variable nodes and parity check nodes. Variable nodes are used to represent codeword bits, whereas parity check nodes are used to represent constraints among the bits.
During each decoding iteration, every node in the graph processes its input messages, and produces one output message for each graphical connection. Variable nodes calculate a sum of their input LLR messages, whereas parity check nodes calculate a hyperbolic tan and inverse-tan function that is usually implemented using lookup tables. In the min-sum algorithm, the parity check node function is simplified to a simple XORing of LLR sign bits and a minimum of LLR magnitudes. For the sake of brevity, we will not fully describe the algorithm and calculations; descriptions of the sum–product and min-sum algorithms can be found in [20] and [21].

Fig. 1. Bipartite graph representation of an LDPC code.

B. Conventional Scheduling Algorithm

Fig. 2(b) shows a timing diagram of a variable node compu-

tation in the conventional (also called flooding) scheduling al-

gorithm [15]. In the diagram, the variable node is connected to

three check nodes , , and . The variable node has different

lengths of wires labeled as , , and , where wire

is longer than the other wires and shown in Fig. 2(a). In

the conventional scheduling algorithm, the node computations

are performed by using all updated messages transmitted from

the check nodes along the wires, including the longer wires,

such as of Fig. 2(a), where indicates the clock cycle

number. Therefore, in the min-sum and sum–product decoding

algorithms, one of the node output

is computed by using

inputs , , and which is a channel message as shown

(1)
Since the data transfer delay is dominant in the fully parallel LDPC decoder, the clock frequency is determined by the wiring delay of the longest wires, such as , which in turn limits the decoder throughput.

Fig. 2. Conventional scheduling algorithm. (a) Model. (b) Timing diagram.

check node B, the longer wire is divided into two wires

and shown as Fig. 3(a). While the cycle time can be re-

duced, messages on the longer wires are transmitted between

computation nodes over two clock cycles. Then, the node com-

putations are performed by using the most recent available mes-

sages. In the diagram, one of the node output is computed

by using inputs ,

transmitted from two variable

nodes and , and the channel message as shown

(2)

C. Flooding-Type Update-Scheduling Algorithms

In (2), node output

is determined by using outdated mes-

Fig. 3(b) shows a timing diagram of our proposed scheduling sage

from a previous iteration, which is stored in

algorithm, which is a slight variation on a conventional sched- the register between the variable node and check node B. This

uling algorithm. In the proposed scheduling algorithm, registers is different from (1) in the conventional scheduling algorithm,

are inserted into long wires. In the diagram, since a register is where output is determined by using all updated messages

inserted into the longer wire between the variable node and the

and . Although some of the input messages may have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:17:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Fig. 3. Flooding-type updated scheduling algorithm. (a) Model. (b) Timing di-

agram.

Fig. 4. Flooding-type scheduling algorithm for simultaneously decoding two

codewords. (a) Model. (b) Timing diagram.

changed, this is not seen as being detrimental to the decoding word algorithm, and has been exploited before, for example, in [22]. codeword Therefore, the critical path delay can be reduced without sig-

, as shown

and the channel message of second

nificantly affecting the BER. Since the node computations are performed by using partially updated messages, this algorithm is called a flooding-type update-schedule algorithm, to differentiate it from a conventional flooding algorithm.
If a single (or odd number of) register(s) is inserted for the longer wires shown in Fig. 3(a), then two different codewords

(4)
Since the two different messages are not mixed by inserting the two registers into the longer wires, the two codewords can be simultaneously decoded by only doubling the number of registers inserted between the computation nodes.

cannot be decoded simultaneously [19]. In this paper, rather than a single register, two (or an even number of) registers are

III. DESIGN FLOW FOR REGISTER INSERTION

inserted into the longer wires. Fig. 4(b) shows the timing dia- In this section, we describe design flows of inserting registers

gram of the proposed scheduling algorithm for simultaneously for long wires. The first flow is based on wire lengths that are

decoding two codewords. In the diagram, the longer wire is di- predicted using prelayout estimates; we refer to this flow as the

vided into three wires

,

, and . In this algorithm, predicted layout flow. The second flow is based on performing

two codewords are transmitted alternatively from check nodes. an initial layout run using the conventional LDPC decoder, that

During the first cycle, one of the node output of the first code- provides more accurate wire length information; this informa-

word

in the variable node is computed by using inputs tion is then used to partition wires; we refer to this flow as the

of first codewords

and

transmitted from two initial layout flow.

check nodes , , and the channel message of first codeword

as shown

A. Predicted Layout Flow

Fig. 5(a) shows our design flow for inserting registers into

(3) longer wires based on the predicted layout [19]. In this de-

sign flow, the selection of longer wires is made before place-

During the next cycle, one of the node output of second code- ment-and-routing. First, simplistic assumptions for the place-

word

is computed by using inputs of second code- ment of computation nodes are made in order to estimate the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:17:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: DESIGN OF HIGH-THROUGHPUT FULLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODERS

485

Fig. 5. Design flows for inserting registers into longer wires. (a) Predicted layout flow. (b) Initial layout flow.

wire lengths between the computation nodes. In this assump- that is generated by performing an initial synthesis and place-

tion, since blocks including two variable nodes and one check and-route run that does not include the inserted registers. Since

node are placed virtually, wire information is extracted from the placement and routing are performed without restriction of the

predicted layout. Second, the wires are divided into two groups placement, the number of longer wires is reduced. Next, the

labeled Group A and Group B, depending on the wire lengths wires are divided into two groups, similarly to our previous flow.

of the predicted layout. Third, hardware description language Finally, the layout of the proposed LDPC decoder is generated

(HDL) code of the registers is generated by inserting registers using the same flow as before.

into longer wires from Group B. The threshold to separate wires into Group A and Group B is half of the maximum wire length.

IV. EVALUATION

Fourth, the gate-level netlist is generated in the synthesis, phase keeping the block that is two variable nodes and one check nodes. Fifth, placement is performed with the same position as the predicted layout, and then the layout is generated after the routing.

To evaluate the proposed LDPC decoders, we compare two decoders based on the proposed design flow, with two decoders that use a conventional flooding schedule, and a decoder that uses our previous design flow [19]. The first conventional decoder, labeled Conventional1, uses registers in the variable

B. Initial Layout Flow

nodes only, and can only decode a single codeword at any time. The second conventional decoder, labeled Conventional2,

The aforementioned design flow makes it possible to raise uses registers in both the variable and check nodes, and can

the clock frequency by dividing longer wires into shorter ones, therefore, simultaneously decode two codewords. The first

but there is large number of longer wires in the predicted layout. proposed decoder, labeled Proposed1, includes single registers

Therefore, large number of registers are necessary, which causes that are inserted into long wires. Only one codeword can be

comparatively large power dissipation and limited throughput. decoded at any time. Proposed1 is implemented by using the

To reduce the number of registers for dividing the longer wires, flooding-type update-scheduling algorithm shown in Fig. 3. The

new design flow is proposed not using the predicted layout, be- second proposed decoder, labeled Proposed2, includes double

cause the restriction of the placement causes the large number registers that are inserted along long wires, and is implemented

of longer wires.

by using the flooding-type update-scheduling algorithm for

Fig. 5(b) shows our updated design flow for inserting registers simultaneously decoding two codewords as shown as Fig. 4.

into longer wires. In the proposed design flow, wire information These two decoders (Proposed1 and Proposed2) are designed

is estimated using the layout of a conventional LDPC decoder by using the initial layout of the conventional decoder, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:17:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

TABLE I NUMBER OF INSERTED REGISTERS

Fig. 6. Number of wires versus wire length between the computation nodes. (a) In the predicted layout flow using the previous design flow. (b) In initial layout flow using the proposed design flow.

uses pipeline registers in both variable and check nodes. In all

decoders, decoding is performed by using a min-sum decoding

algorithm [21] with 4-bit log-likelihood-ratio messages that

include one sign bit and three magnitude bits. The code is a

length-1024, (3,6)-regular LDPC code.

A. Comparison of Design Flow Fig. 6 shows the histograms of wire length between the com-

Fig. 7. Number of wires versus wire length between the computation nodes in final layout using the proposed design flow. (a) Proposed1 decoder. (b) Proposed2 decoder.

putation nodes in the predicted layout using the previous design

flow [19] shown as Fig. 5(a), and in the initial layout using the divided using registers. The decoders use 4-bit precision, so regproposed design flow shown as Fig. 5(b). In the proposed de- isters are actually inserted into four wires, when at least one of

sign flow, the number of longer wires is reduced using the initial place-and-route layout, while the number of longer wires is large because of restrictions of the placement in the previous design flow. Therefore, a large number of registers is necessary in the previous design flow, leading to large power dissipation and limited throughput.

the four wires have greater than 1.65 mm length. The number of registers, where one frame is decoded (Proposed1), is reduced by 94.6% with respect to our previous design flow. Also, the number of registers, where two frames are decoded (Proposed2) shown in Fig. 4, is reduced by 89.2% with respect to the previous count.

Table I shows a comparison of the number of registers inserted into three LDPC decoders based on the flooding-type up- B. Wire Length

date-scheduling algorithm. Since the threshold between Group Fig. 7 shows the histograms of wire length between the com-

A and Group B is half of the maximum wire length in the con- putation nodes in the Proposed1 and Proposed2 decoders. Since

ventional design flow, wires that are longer than 1.65 mm are the registers for dividing the longer wires are properly estimated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:17:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: DESIGN OF HIGH-THROUGHPUT FULLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODERS

487

noise (AWGN) channel. In our previous LDPC decoder [19], 34 clock cycles are necessary for the same coding performance as a conventional LDPC decoder with 16 iterations, which corresponds to 16 clock cycles in the Conventional1 decoder, and to 33 clock cycles in the Conventional2 decoder. Since the number of registers between the computation nodes in the proposed design flow is reduced in comparison with that in the previous design flow shown as Table I, the number of transmitted messages delayed by two or three cycles is reduced, which results in more rapid convergence. Therefore, the number of clock cycles required for the same coding performance can be reduced to 30 and 31 in the Proposed1 and Proposed2 decoders, respectively.

D. Throughput and Area

Table II summarizes performance specifications of the

LDPC decoders using a 90 nm CMOS process. A chip layout is

generated based on the proposed design flow shown in Fig. 5.

Fig. 9 shows the layout of the proposed LDPC decoder for

simultaneously decoding two codewords (Proposed2). Perfor-

mance metrics are evaluated through a postlayout simulation

using Synopsys JupiterXT. In the conventional algorithm, the

worst-case delay is restricted by the longer wires in the con-

ventional LDPC decoders. Therefore, the uncoded throughput

is limited to 5.31 Gb/s at a clock frequency of 166 MHz in

the Conventional1. Since the clock frequency is improved to

400 MHz by partitioning the wires while also increasing the re-

quired number of clock cycles in [19], the uncoded throughput

is 6.02 Gb/s and is 13% higher than that of the conventional

LDPC decoder (Conventional1) with a 3.5% area penalty. In

the Proposed1 decoder, since the number of messages that

are delayed by two cycles is reduced because of the reduction

of the registers between the computation nodes, the uncoded

throughput becomes 6.83 Gb/s and is 29% higher than that of

the conventional LDPC decoder (Conventional1) with a 2.1%

area penalty. Moreover, in the Proposed2 decoder, two code-

Fig. 8. Coding performances of the length-1024, (3,6)-regular LDPC code with 4-bit and floating-point messages using BPSK modulation on an AWGN channel with at least 100 BERs per data point. (a) BER performance. (b) FER performance.

words are simultaneously decoded by inserting two registers into longer wires, so the uncoded throughput is 13.21 Gb/s, which is 28% higher than that of the Conventional2 decoder, that simultaneously decodes two codewords, with a 1.6% area

penalty.

and inserted into the longer wires using the proposed design flow, the maximum wire lengths become 2.3 and 2.4 mm in E. Power and Energy Consumption

the Proposed1 and Proposed2 decoders, respectively. Although it would be natural to assume that the maximum wire length would cut in half, the maximum wire lengths in the Proposed1 and Proposed2 decoders are slightly larger due to the placement-and-routing tools not reusing the initial placement of cells. We also attribute the small difference between the Proposed1 and Proposed2 maximum wire lengths to the random nature of the CAD tools. But, in contrast, it is 3.3 mm in the initial layout, as shown in Fig. 6(b). Therefore, using the proposed design flow the maximum wire lengths can be reduced to 70% and 73% of the initial length in the Proposed1 and Proposed2 decoders, respectively.

Fig. 10 shows the message switching activity in the length-

1024, (3,6)-regular LDPC decoders with 4-bit messages. In the

Proposed1 decoder, the message switching activity is lower than

that of the conventional algorithm. While consecutive messages

are from independent codewords in the Conventional2 and the

Proposed2 decoders, resulting in higher switching activity, and

that of the Proposed2 is lower than that of the Conventional2

at high

. In contrast, power dissipation due to the clock

accounts for a large share of total power dissipation, especially

at high

, as shown in Table II. In [19], the energy con-

sumption is 0.171 nJ/bit at an

value of 3 dB, which is

27% larger than that of the conventional LDPC decoder (Con-

C. Coding Performance

ventional1). By reducing the number of registers in the proposed design flow, the energy consumption in the Proposed1 decoder

Fig. 8 shows the simulated BER and frame error rate (FER) becomes almost the same. Moreover, in the Proposed2 decoder,

results using BPSK modulation on an additive white Gaussian the energy consumption at an

value of 5 dB becomes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:17:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

TABLE II COMPARISONS OF PERFORMANCES IN LENGTH-1024, (3,6)-REGULAR LDPC DECODERS WITH 4-BIT MESSAGES

STARC 90 nm CMOS technology. VDD = 1:2 V

V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 9. Layout of the length-1024, (3,6)-regular LDPC decoder with 4-bit messages that simultaneously decodes two codewords (Proposed2).

A methodology for designing LDPC decoders based on wire partitioning is presented for the realization of high-throughput fully parallel LDPC decoders. Our algorithm makes it possible to significantly increase the clock frequency, and hence, the throughput of decoders. Since messages along longer wires are transmitted via registers over several clock cycles, the worst-case propagation delay can be reduced while maintaining the BER performance. Moreover, by inserting an even number of registers into longer wires, two different codewords can be simultaneously decoded, thus improving the throughput at a small penalty in area. Since the number of inserted registers is estimated by using wiring information extracted from an initial layout, only necessary registers are inserted. Therefore, the number of registers can be reduced in comparison with our previous design flow. As a result, we can achieve a uncoded throughput of greater than 13 Gb/s at an energy consumption of under 0.1 nJ/bit.
REFERENCES

Fig. 10. Message switching activity in the length-1024, (3,6)-regular LDPC decoder with 4-bit messages.

0.098 nJ/bit and is 30% smaller than that of the conventional

LDPC decoder (Conventional2) because of the lower switching

activity at high

.

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolian Area Networks, IEEE 802.16e Standard, Feb. 28, 2006. [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.16e-2005.pdf
[3] World Wide Web “IEEE 802.3an Task Force,”, Jun. 8, 2004. [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/3/an/index.html
[4] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “VLSI architectures for iterative decoders in magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 748–755, Mar. 2001.
[5] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2001, pp. 3019–3024.
[6] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low density parity check codes decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Sydney, Australia, 2001, vol. 4, pp. 202–205.
[7] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI Implementation-oriented (3,k)-regular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), Sep. 2001, pp. 25–36.
[8] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 627–650, Aug. 2003.
[9] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:17:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ONIZAWA et al.: DESIGN OF HIGH-THROUGHPUT FULLY PARALLEL LDPC DECODERS

489

[10] C.-C. Lin, K.-L. Lin, H.-C. Chang, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 3.33 Gb/s (1200, 720) low-density parity check code decoder,” in Proc. ESSCIRC, 2005, pp. 211–214.
[11] S.-H. Kang and I.-C. Park, “Loosely coupled memory-based decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1045–1056, May 2006.
[12] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decodr chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 683–698, May 2006.
[13] X.-Y. Shih, C. Z. Zhan, C. H. Lin, and A.-Y. Wu, “An 8.29 mm 52 mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile WiMAX system in 0.13
m CMOS process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp.
672–683, Mar. 2008. [14] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu,
and S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC decoder chip based on self-routing network for IEEE 802.16e applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 684–694, Mar. 2008. [15] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002. [16] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-Gbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kobe, Japan, May 2005, vol. 5, pp. 5194–5197. [17] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps bit-serial block-interlaced min-sum LDPC decoder in 0.13-um CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE 2007 Custom Integr. Circuits Conf., Sep. 2007, pp. 459–462. [18] T. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, S. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, P. Goud, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange,” Elsevier Integr. VLSI J., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 385–398, May 2008. [19] N. Onizawa, T. Ikeda, T. Hanyu, and V. C. Gaudet, “3.2-Gb/s 1024-b rate-1/2 LDPC decoder chip using a flooding-type update-schedule algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst., Aug. 2007, pp. 217–220. [20] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001. [21] C. Schlegel and L. Perez, Trellis and Turbo Coding. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press, 2004. [22] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414–416, Oct. 2001.

Naoya Onizawa (S’05) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, in 2004 and 2006, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree from the Graduate School of Engineering, Tohoku University.
His research interests include communication integration circuit design, asynchronous data transfer circuit design, and design methodology for large-scaled multiple-valued circuits.
Mr. Onizawa is a Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).
Takahiro Hanyu (S’87–M’89) received the B.E., M.E., and D.E. degrees in electronic engineering from Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, in 1984, 1986, and 1989, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University. His research interests include multiple-valued current-mode logic and its application to asynchronous data-transfer VLSI systems.
Prof. Hanyu was a recipient of the Outstanding Paper Awards at the 1985 and 1987 IEEE International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic, the Niwa Memorial Award in 1988, the Sakai Memorial Award from the Information Processing Society of Japan, in 2000, Large-Scale Integrated (LSI) Design of the Year Award from the Semiconductor Industry News in 2002.
Vincent C. Gaudet (S’97-M’03) received the B.Sc. degree in computer engineering from the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, in 1995, and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1997 and 2003, respectively.
In 2002, he was a Research Associate with the Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommunications de Bretagne, Brest, France. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. His research interests include information processing microsystems, and more specifically, on energy-efficient graph-based decoding of error control codes such as Turbo and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Dr. Gaudet currently serves as a Digest Editor for the IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, and as an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—PART II: EXPRESS BRIEFS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:17:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

