992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Capacity-Achieving Codes With Bounded Graphical Complexity and Maximum Likelihood Decoding
Chun-Hao Hsu and Achilleas Anastasopoulos, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, the existence of capacity-achieving codes for memoryless binary-input output-symmetric (MBIOS) channels under maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding with bounded graphical complexity is investigated. Graphical complexity of a code is defined as the number of edges in the graphical representation of the code per information bit and is proportional to the decoding complexity per information bit per iteration under iterative decoding. Irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA) codes are studied first. Utilizing the asymptotic average weight distribution (AAWD) of these codes and invoking Divsalar’s bound on the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel, it is shown that simple nonsystematic IRA ensembles outperform systematic IRA and regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) ensembles with the same graphical complexity, and are at most 0.124 dB away from the Shannon limit. However, a conclusive result as to whether these nonsystematic IRA codes can really achieve capacity cannot be reached. Motivated by this inconclusive result, a new family of codes is proposed, called low-density parity-check and generator matrix (LDPC-GM) codes, which are serially concatenated codes with an outer LDPC code and an inner low-density generator matrix (LDGM) code. It is shown that these codes can achieve capacity on any MBIOS channel using ML decoding and also achieve capacity on any BEC using belief propagation (BP) decoding, both with bounded graphical complexity. Moreover, it is shown that, under certain conditions, these capacity-achieving codes have linearly increasing minimum distances and achieve the asymptotic Gilbert–Varshamov bound for all rates.
Index Terms—Asymptotic growth rate, average weight distribution, capacity-achieving codes, density evolution, Gilbert–Varshamov bound, irregular repeat-accumulate codes, low-density generator matrix codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, maximum likelihood decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
D URING the last decade, several codes have been found to achieve capacity on the binary erasure channel (BEC) under iterative decoding. The first well-known example is the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which were introduced by Gallager [1] and proved to be capacity-achieving about forty years later [2]–[5]. Another example is the irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA) codes, whose systematic [6], [7] and nonsys-
Manuscript received March 29, 2006; revised June 18, 2009. Current version published March 10, 2010. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation by Grant CAREER-CCF-0346977. This paper was presented in part at the Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, September 2005.
C.-H. Hsu is with Qualcomm Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA (e-mail: chhsu@umich.edu).
A. Anastasopoulos is with the Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail: anastas@umich.edu).
Communicated by T. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2039084

tematic [8] versions were both proved to be capacity-achieving.

One common feature shared by these codes is that they are de-

fined on bipartite graphs with variable and check nodes [9],

and thus they can be decoded using iterative decoding [also

known as message passing or belief propagation (BP)] algo-

rithms, having complexity (per iteration) proportional to the

number of edges in their graphical representations.

In view of the capacity-achieving property of these graph-

based code ensembles on the BEC, and the connection between

decoding complexity and graph representation, a fundamental

question arises: “how simple can the graphs be as a function of

the corresponding code performance?” In [10], the authors give

an information theoretical lower bound to show that if all vari-

able nodes are transmitted, then the graphical complexity (de-

fined as the number of edges per information bit in the graph)

should grow as

as the multiplicative gap to capacity, ,

decreases to zero on any memoryless binary-input output-sym-

metric (MBIOS) channel. This is true even when maximum-

likelihood (ML) decoding is used. On the other hand, allowing

state nodes in the graph, the authors in [8] show that nonsystem-

atic IRA codes can achieve capacity on the BEC using BP de-

coding with bounded graphical complexity. However, since the

density evolution (DE) method used in the proofs of [8] becomes

analytically intractable on channels other than the BEC, it is still

unknown whether there exist capacity-achieving codes (even

when ML decoding is used) with bounded graphical complexity

on general MBIOS channels. Due to the difficulty in estimating

the performance of BP on noisy channels, all research activity

in this direction follows one of two basic approaches. In the first

approach, approximations to DE are utilized ( e.g., Gaussian

approximation) or numerical evaluation of the densities is per-

formed, such as in the work of [11]–[13]. In the second approach

the performance of ML decoding is evaluated, as in [14]–[17]. In

this paper we follow the latter approach. It is noted that, although

good ML performance does not imply sufficiently good itera-

tive decoding performance, the value of studying the ML perfor-

mance is twofold. First, there are improved iterative decoding al-

gorithms that approach closely the ML performance [18], [19].

Thus, it is conceivable that the ML performance can be achieved

with decoding algorithms having complexity close to that of

iterative decoding. Moreover, achieving capacity with ML de-

coding gives a necessary condition for achieving capacity with

suboptimal iterative decoding algorithms without resorting to

the DE method, which becomes an infinite dimensional problem

on channels other than the BEC as mentioned above.

We first investigate the ML performance of IRA codes on

MBIOS channels. This ensemble is a reasonable candidate for

achieving capacity on MBIOS channels with bounded graph-

ical complexity, since it is proved to have this property on the

BEC. ML analysis is performed utilizing the average weight dis-

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HSU AND ANASTASOPOULOS: CAPACITY-ACHIEVING CODES WITH BOUNDED GRAPHICAL COMPLEXITY

993

tribution (AWD) of systematic and nonsystematic versions of the ensembles. The asymptotic growth rate of the AWD [in the following we refer to this quantity as the asymptotic average weight distribution (AAWD)] of IRA ensembles is used to obtain various ML performance bounds as in [15], [20], and [21]. Our approach suggests that simple nonsystematic IRA codes may have a better guaranteed performance than systematic IRA and LDPC codes with the same graphical complexity. In particular, simple nonsystematic IRA codes are shown to perform at most 0.124 dB away from the Shannon limit when Divsalar’s bound [15] is used on the binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel. However, a conclusive answer as to whether these nonsystematic IRA ensembles achieve capacity was not reached. The reason lies in the fact that their AAWD cannot be proved to be strictly negative in the region of normalized weights close to zero. As a result, it cannot be guaranteed that the number of low weight codewords in these ensembles decreases exponentially fast. This further implies that their polynomial growth behavior has to be estimated; a seemingly more difficult task.
Motivated by the inconclusive result regarding the capacityachieving property of IRA ensembles using ML decoding, we introduce a new family of codes, namely the concatenated lowdensity parity-check and generator matrix (LDPC-GM) codes, which are constructed by serially concatenating an outer LDPC code and an inner low-density generator matrix (LDGM) code. The new family of codes introduced closely resembles raptor codes [22]. They are similar to certain protograph constructions [23], and the constructions of [24]. Another construction with this characteristic is concatenated tree codes [25]. Special forms of concatenation of outer LDPC-like codes and LDGM codes (in the form of an accumulator) have been considered previously in [26] as well.
In this work, we prove that LDPC-GM codes can achieve capacity using ML decoding on any MBIOS channel with bounded graphical complexity. Previous works on the analysis of similar ensembles include the work in [27], where a rudimentary performance evaluation of raptor codes on noisy channels is performed based on the union bound and bounds on the weight distribution of Raptor codes. In our work, by deriving and analyzing the AWD and AAWD of the LDPC-GM codes with a rate-1 LDGM inner code, we show that the inner rate-1 LDGM code helps to eliminate high weight LDPC codewords while maintaining a vanishingly small amount of low weight codewords. In addition to being capacity achieving, it is also shown that these ensembles achieve the asymptotic Gilbert–Varshamov bound [28], [29]. As a supportive fact on the potential of these ensembles under iterative decoding, we also show that LDPC-GM ensembles can achieve capacity on the BEC with bounded decoding complexity (per information bit) for all erasure probabilities in (0, 1). This fact can also be viewed as an instance of symmetry observed in [26].
The remaining of this paper is structured as follows. We present some background on AWD, AAWD of IRA and LDGM codes in Section II, and the results are utilized to numerically evaluate the ML performance of these codes. In Section III, we introduce the LDPC-GM codes and prove that they are capacity-achieving with bounded graphical complexity on MBIOS channels. Allowing the outer LDPC code and inner

Fig. 1. Factor graph for LDGM and IRA codes. Information bits are denoted by filled gray circles, parity bits by open circles, and check nodes by squares. (a) LDGM. (b) IRA.

LDGM code to be more generally irregular, we prove that the LDPC-GM codes can achieve capacity on any BEC with bounded decoding complexity in Section IV. Finally, we conclude this work in Section V.

II. BACKGROUND: LDGM AND IRA CODES

Consider the LDGM and IRA codes as shown in Fig. 1. As

can be seen in the figure, both of them have two different sets of

variable nodes, i.e., the information nodes and the parity nodes.

The systematic version of them uses all the variable nodes as

its codeword, while the nonsystematic one uses only the parity

nodes. Therefore, letting denote the number of information

bits and denote the number of parity bits, the rate of the

systematic and nonsystematic codes is

and ,

respectively.

Let be the fraction of edges between the information and

check nodes that are connected to an information node with

check node neighbors, and be the fraction of the same edges

that are connected to a check node with information node

neighbors. Furthermore, define

and

(1)

to be the generating functions of ’s and ’s. These two func-

tions are used to specify the ensembles of LDGM and IRA codes

assuming random permutation of edges between information

and check nodes within each ensemble, and are known as the

“degree distribution” pair. A special case is the “ regular”

code ensemble defined by

and

.

The above degree distribution pair

is from the edge

perspective. It will facilitate our following analysis if we also

have an equivalent description from the node perspective. Let

(respectively, ) be the fraction of information (respectively

check) nodes that are connected to check (respectively, infor-

mation) nodes. Then we have

and

(2)

A. Average Input-Parity Weight Enumerator and Asymptotic Average Weight Distribution of LDGM and IRA Ensembles

The input-output weight enumerator (IOWE)

of a bi-

nary linear block code is defined to be the number of code-

words in with input Hamming weight and output Hamming

weight . Similarly, we can define the input-parity weight enu-

merator (IPWE) for LDGM and IRA codes to denote the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

number of codewords with input weight and parity weight

. Note that IPWE and IOWE are the same for nonsystematic

LDGM and IRA codes, but different for systematic ones. In the

following, we summarize some results on the average IPWE

(AIPWE) of LDGM and IRA ensembles.

Fact 1: The AIPWE of the

LDGM ensemble can be

expressed as

as a serial concatenated code with an outer LDGM code and an inner accumulator code, as in [33].
We will now use the above facts to derive expressions for the AAWD of LDGM and IRA ensembles. Consider an LDGM or IRA ensemble with AIPWE . Let be the average number of codewords of weight in a randomly drawn code from the ensemble. Define the AAWD of an ensemble with AWD to be

(8)

In particular, for the

We have the following result.

(3) regular LDGM ensemble we have

Lemma 1: The AAWD of the nonsystematic

regular

LDGM, nonsystematic regular IRA, systematic reg-

ular LDGM, and systematic

regular IRA ensembles, re-

spectively, satisfy

(4)

where polynomial

denotes the coefficient of , and

in the

(5a) (9)
(5b)

This fact can be established in a number of different ways.

First, since LDGM codes are duals of LDPC codes, one can

use the extended version of the Macwilliams identity [30] to-

gether with the results of [31] for LDPC codes. Second, it can be

obtained indirectly (through the corresponding average IOWE)

(10)

from the results in [32] for enumerators for

trapping sets.

Finally, it can be obtained through direct combinatorial analysis

as in [33]. Similarly, for IRA codes we have the following.

Fact 2: The AIPWE of the pressed as

IRA ensemble can be ex-

(11)

(6)

In particular, for the

regular IRA ensemble we have

(12)

where

1, and

is

(7) the binary entropy function with natural logarithms.

R c; d 1 may not be the true guaranteed rate of the nonsystematic ( ) regular
Again, this fact can be derived either using the results in [31] LDGM ensemble since nonsystematic codes with repeated codewords can un(and similar results as in [34]–[36]), or by viewing an IRA code dergo a rate reduction.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HSU AND ANASTASOPOULOS: CAPACITY-ACHIEVING CODES WITH BOUNDED GRAPHICAL COMPLEXITY

995

Proof: The AAWD of the nonsystematic

regular

LDGM ensemble with AWD can be calculated as follows:

(14c) (14d)

(13a) (13b) (13c)

where the notation

means there exist and

such that

for all

. The de-

rived upper bound converges to 0 as approaches infinity for

all

. Therefore, if

, the nonsystematic

regular LDGM ensemble essentially suffers no rate reduc-

tion with asymptotically high probability. This last inequality is

shown to be true in the following. Starting from the expression

in (9) with

, we have for every

(13d)

(15)

(13e)

However, the last expression is exactly the AAWD of a Gal-

lager’s

ensemble of codeword length , variable node

degree , and check node degree as defined in [1] with rate 0

(the expression for the AAWD of Gallager’s

ensemble

was derived in [39] and it appears as an upper bound in [1]).

Thus

where the inequality is due to the fact that, for nonsystematic ensembles, different input words can result in the same output codeword, (13d) is due to (4), and is a function of that converges to 0 as approaches infinity. Now, (9) follows from well known results on the asymptotic behavior of combinatorial quantities established in [37, Theorem 2] and [38, Lemma 18.9]. The expressions in (10), (11), and (12) can be derived in a similar way.

(16a) (16b)
(16c) (16d)

Analogous results for the irregular LDGM and IRA ensembles can also be obtained in a straightforward manner and are omitted here.
The derived upper bounds on the AAWD of nonsystematic ensembles are sufficient for obtaining various ML performance upper bounds. However, we still have to determine the guaranteed (design) rate of these codes due to the possible occur-

where the last two equalities follow directly from [1, Theorem

A.1].

Since the accumulator code maps distinct input words to dis-

tinct output words, the same conclusion is true for the nonsys-

tematic

regular IRA ensemble.

B. Numerical Results

rence of rate reduction. We now show that regular nonsystem- Although the AAWD’s given in Theorem 1 do not assume

atic LDGM and IRA codes indeed suffer no rate reduction with closed forms, we can still numerically evaluate these expres-

asymptotically high probability.

sions to acquire some intuition and insight on the performance

Theorem 1: The nonsystematic

regular LDGM and

IRA ensembles have guaranteed rate

with asymptoti-

cally high probability, i.e., these ensembles suffer no rate reduc-

tion.

Proof: We start with the LDGM ensembles. Let be

the true rate of a randomly drawn code from the nonsystem-

atic

regular LDGM ensemble. Let

be the random

variable denoting the number of input words that result in all-0

codeword in a randomly drawn code. Then, we have by the lin-

earity of the LDGM codes and Markov’s inequality that

of the LDGM and IRA ensembles. Fig. 2 depicts the AAWD of the nonsystematic (10,5) regular LDGM and IRA ensembles, and compares them with those of the (7,14) regular LDPC ensemble given in [37] and the rate-1/2 random ensemble. As can be seen in the figure, the IRA ensemble has a more concentrated AAWD than the LDGM ensemble. This demonstrates how the rate-1 accumulator code helps to eliminate low weight codewords in the nonsystematic LDGM codes. Moreover, this figure shows that the AAWD of the nonsystematic (10,5) regular IRA ensemble well approximates that of the random ensemble with the same rate for positive values of the AAWD.

A similar comparison is shown in Fig. 3. The effect of the

accumulator code is also evident for both the systematic (12,12) (14a) and the nonsystematic (10,5) regular IRA ensembles. It is also

(14b) evident in this figure that the AAWD of the nonsystematic IRA

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Fig. 2. The AAWD of the nonsystematic (10,5) regular LDGM ensemble, nonsystematic (10,5) regular IRA ensemble, (7,14) regular LDPC ensemble, and the random ensemble. All of them have rate 1/2, and the logarithm is to the base 2.

Fig. 3. The AAWD of the systematic (12,12) regular LDGM ensemble, systematic (12,12) regular IRA ensemble, nonsystematic (10,5) regular IRA ensemble, and the random ensemble. All of them have rate 1/2, and the logarithm is to the base 2.

ensemble is better than that of the systematic one with the same Compared with LDPC ensembles, which are proved in [10] to

graphical complexity. This finding is consistent with the results have a random-ensemble-like AAWD only at the limit when

of [8] for the BEC.

the check node degree goes to infinity, IRA ensembles appear

Motivated by the above numerical examples, we now focus to have a great potential of achieving capacity with bounded

on the nonsystematic regular IRA ensembles and investigate (small) check node degrees.

their AAWD’s with different check node degrees and the same However, it is proved in [40] that if a code can be encoded in

rate. Fig. 4 shows that the AAWD of the rate 1/2 nonsystem- linear time using sublinear memory (IRA codes fall in this cate-

atic regular IRA ensembles approaches that of the random code gory) then this code cannot have minimum distance growing lin-

ensemble (for positive values of the AAWD) with increasing early with . This result explains why the AAWD of IRA ensem-

check node degrees. In particular, the AAWD of the nonsys- bles is always nonnegative as can be seen in the figures, and im-

tematic (12,6) regular IRA ensemble almost coincides with that poses a difficulty on proving IRA codes to be capacity-achieving

of the random ensemble for all growth exponent values greater on MBIOS channels even with ML decoding. For instance, the

than 0 with a moderate check node degree equal to

. ML bound in [16] cannot be used in the same way used to prove

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HSU AND ANASTASOPOULOS: CAPACITY-ACHIEVING CODES WITH BOUNDED GRAPHICAL COMPLEXITY

997

Fig. 4. Comparison for the AAWD of nonsystematic regular IRA ensembles with different right degrees. All of them have rate 1/2, and the logarithm is to the base 2.

that regular LDPC codes can achieve capacity on MBIOS chan-

nels with ML decoding [10]. In the next section, we introduce

a new family of codes that circumvent this problem and are

proved to be capacity-achieving on MBIOS channels with ML

decoding.

To further investigate how regular IRA ensembles perform

on the BIAWGN channel with ML decoding, we invoke Di-

vsalar’s bound [15] on the minimum bit signal to noise ratio

(SNR)

required for reliable communication as follows:

COMPARISON OF (

TABLE I ) AS GIVEN IN (17) FOR SEVERAL ENSEMBLES WITH
RATE 1/2

(17)

This bound is shown in [15] to have the same error exponent as the tangential sphere bound of Poltyrev [20], which often happens to be the tightest reported upper bound for block codes transmitted over the BIAWGN channel (see [41]). The results for rate-1/2 nonsystematic regular IRA, systematic regular IRA and regular LDPC ensembles are summarized in Table I. The comparison is based on the same graphical complexity, denoted by in the table. As can be seen in the table, the nonsystematic regular IRA ensembles have lower performance bounds than that of the systematic regular IRA and regular LDPC ensembles with the same graphical complexity. Also, all the nonsystematic regular IRA ensembles listed in the table with a check node degree greater than or equal to 4 yield the same performance bound, 0.308 dB, which is only 0.124 dB away from the Shannon limit. This result seems to suggest that nonsystematic regular IRA codes with small check node degrees can come very close to the BIAWGN channel capacity.

inner LDGM code. In particular, we show that if the outer code is Gallager’s LDPC code and the inner code is a rate-1 regular LDGM code, then this LDPC-GM ensemble can achieve capacity on MBIOS channels using ML decoding with bounded graphical complexity.

A. Gallager’s LDPC Ensemble

Consider Gallager’s

LDPC ensemble of codeword

length , variable node degree , and check node degree as

introduced in [1] with guaranteed rate

. Let

be the average number of codewords of weight in a randomly

drawn code from the ensemble. The asymptotic growth rate of

is given in [39] (it appears as an upper bound in [1]) to be

(18a)

III. LDPC-GM CODES

In this section, we introduce the LDPC-GM codes, which are serially concatenated codes with an outer LDPC code and an
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(18b)

998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

Fig. 5. The factor graph of the LDPC-GM codes.

Some useful characterizations of

and

are summa-

rized here.

Fact 3: There exists a

, such that

1)

.

2)

and has exactly one local minimum, but no

local maximum for all

.

3)

for all

, and

.

4)

has exactly one local maximum at

, and

.

5) When is even,

, for all

.

after further encoded by the inner LDGM code and just over-

count them, then due to the randomness of the LDPC code con-

struction and from (4), the AWD

of this LDPC-GM en-

semble can be bounded by

(20a) (20b)

In Fact 3, item 1 to 4 are either proved explicitly in [1, Ap-

pendix A] or directly result from there, and item 5 follows from

the linearity of the LDPC codes and the fact that the all-1 word

is always a codeword when is even. In order to use item 5, and

for other mathematical convenience, we will assume throughout

this paper that is even.

We now state two additional results from [42], which will help

our later analysis involving LDPC codes. The first result gives

a closed form upper bound of

, which is tight especially

when is around 1/2.

Fact 4: [42, Lemma 1] .
The next result gives a sufficient condition on sired lower bound of .

for any de-

Fact 5: [42, Lemma 3] Given any , if

(20c)

where we have used (4), and the change of the range of the

summation in the last equality is due to the fact that the smallest

power of in

is and the largest power of

is

, since is assumed to be even.

This further implies that

for

and

, and justifies the last equality. To

calculate the asymptotic growth rate of

, we employ the

results of [37] and [38, Lemma 18.9] and substitute

to

get

(21a) (21b)

(19) (21c)

then

, where we denote by

, such that

.

the unique

(21d)

B. Concatenation of LDPC and Rate-1 LDGM Codes

(21e)

where we have substituted

in (a), and (b) follows by sub-

Consider the concatenation of an outer Gallager’s

stituting

in the infimum expression. Since Theorem 1

LDPC code and an inner rate-

regular LDGM code as shows that regular LDGM ensembles are free of rate reduction

shown in Fig. 5. For simplicity, we assume that

, with asymptotically high probability, we conclude that the guar-

and is even throughout this paper. If we ignore the possibility anteed rate of this LDPC-GM ensemble is with asymptot-

that different LDPC codewords can become the same codeword ically high probability.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HSU AND ANASTASOPOULOS: CAPACITY-ACHIEVING CODES WITH BOUNDED GRAPHICAL COMPLEXITY

999

C. Analysis of ML Decoding Performance of LDPC-GM Codes on MBIOS Channels

In this section, we will first characterize

, and then use

the derived results to prove that LDPC-GM codes can be ca-

pacity-achieving on MBIOS channels using ML decoding with

bounded graphical complexity. Although

is not sym-

metric about

, the following lemma shows that we can

focus on analyzing

for

and bound

by

for

.

Lemma 2: Proof: Since

for all

.

minimum distance and number of codewords of weight , re-

spectively, of a randomly drawn code from the LDPC-GM en-

semble, and if we denote by

the

normalized Gilbert–Varshamov distance, then from Markov’s

inequality, we have for all

,

(25a) (25b)

(22)

and

for all

, it follows from (21) that for

all

, we have

(25c)

(25d)

(23a)

The last equality follows from the facts proved in The-

orem 2. In particular, for the first term in (25c) we have

for all

and for the second

term we have

(23b) (23c)

for all

(26a) (26b)

In the next theorem, we prove that given any in , the

positive part of

can be upper bounded by the AAWD of

the random ensemble for any rate

if is sufficiently

decreases exponentially for large

(26c)

large. In this case, we also prove that

decreases at least

polynomially with in the negative part of

when

.

Equation (25) implies that 1 asymptotically as approaches infinity when

approaches . Since

Theorem 2: For any

, there exists an integer

can be arbitrarily small, we have proved the following corollary.

such that for all

and for all LDPC-GM codes with

design rate

, there exists a

such that the following two statements are true.

1)

Corollary 1: For any

, there exists an integer

such that for all

, and for all

, all LDPC-GM

codes with design rate

have a normalized minimum

distance, which is arbitrarily close to the Gilbert–Varshamov

if

,

bound with asymptotically high probability.

if if

, .

(24)

In Fig. 6, we compare the AAWD of the LDPC, the

LDPC-GM and the random ensemble with

and

. It is evident that the rate-1 LDGM inner code helps

2)

for all

. to eliminate high weight codewords in the outer LDPC code.

Proof: See Appendix A.

As a tradeoff, the growth rate of some low weight codewords

One important point in the above theorem is that, only de-

pends on , and does not vary with the design rate . There-

fore, given any MBIOS channel with capacity , if we let

, then a fixed and finite

(e.g.,

) depending

only on is sufficient for all LDPC-GM codes of design rate

to satisfy the two statements of Theorem 2. On the

contrary, if were also dependent on (as proved in [10] for

the case of regular LDPC codes), then (and thus the graph-

increases slightly. However, as long as the growth rate of the low weight codewords remains negative, the number of low weight codewords still becomes vanishingly small as goes to infinity.
We are now ready to state the main theorem of this section, which shows that given any MBIOS channel, there always exists a finite value such that the LDPC-GM ensemble with is capacity-achieving.

ical complexity) could approach infinity as approaches the Theorem 3: Given any MBIOS channel with capacity ,

capacity . Indeed, this is the essence of our bounded graph- there exists an integer

such that the average block error

ical complexity result, which is proved later in Theorem 3. If probability of the LDPC-GM ensembles with

,

we let

and

be the random variables denoting the and rate

is vanishingly small when ML decoding is used.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

0 0 Fig. 6. Comparison of w (a), w (a) and H(a) (1 R) with R = 0:5 and k = 8. The logarithm is to the base 2 in this figure.

Proof: See Appendix B.
As can be seen in Fig. 5, the graphical complexity LDPC-GM codes can be evaluated as follows

of these

variable (LDGM), variable to check (LDPC), check to variable (LDPC) and variable to check (LDGM), respectively, as shown in Fig. 5. Then, assuming we are operating at some fixed point, we have the following density evolution equations:

(27)
Since Theorem 3 guarantees that does not approach infinity, we can deduce that these LDPC-GM codes with any rate
can be capacity-achieving on any MBIOS channel with bounded graphical complexity.

(29a) (29b) (29c) (29d)

IV. DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR LDPC-GM CODES ON THE BEC

Although the aforementioned LDPC-GM ensembles have fi-

nite graphical complexity, the decoding complexity under ML

decoding is still exponential. In this section, we show that by

allowing the outer LDPC and inner LDGM codes to be more

generally irregular, the LDPC-GM ensemble can be capacity-

achieving on any BEC under BP decoding with bounded de-

coding complexity per information bit. Although this is not a

proof that the same might be true for MBIOS channels, it is a

good indication of the potential of the LDPC-GM codes.

Consider the concatenation of a

irregular LDPC code

and a (2, 2) regular LDGM code, where and are the standard

variable and check node degree distributions, respectively, from

the edge perspective as defined in [43]. Note that this LDPC-GM

ensemble has guaranteed rate

(28)

where

and

(30)

denoting the fraction of variable nodes in the LDPC code with degree . Equivalently, we have
(31)

Note that (29) are also the density evolution equations for the serially concatenated codes with an outer LDPC code and an inner differentiator code2. Solving these equations for , we have
(32a) (32b)
(32c)

Let be the channel erasure probability, and let , ,

2A differentiator code with input a and output b is defined by the input-

and be the probabilities of erasure on edges from check to output relation b = a + a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HSU AND ANASTASOPOULOS: CAPACITY-ACHIEVING CODES WITH BOUNDED GRAPHICAL COMPLEXITY

1001

If (32) has no solution in , then must converge to 0 Then for

,

and thus must converge to 0 as the number of iterations ap- Moreover, for any

proaches infinity. Therefore, if we have

integer such that4

has only nonnegative coefficients.

, let

be the smallest positive

(40)

(33)

then the BP decoding is successful. Note that, (32) is essentially

the same as (6) in [8] except for the following changes:

,

,

,

, and

.

More generally, (32) is an instance of the symmetry introduced

in [26]. So, in the following, we will use the results proved in

[8] to show two particular degree distribution pairs are capacity-

achieving under BP decoding.

Theorem 4: (Check-regular ensemble) Let

and let (41)

be the truncated degree distribution of . Then the degree

distribution pair

achieves a fraction of the channel

capacity with vanishing bit error probability under BP decoding.

Proof: See Appendix C-C.

The decoding complexity per information bit of this variableregular ensemble can be calculated as follows:

(42)

Then for

and

,

efficients. Moreover, for any

positive integer such that3

(34) (35)

has only nonnegative co-

, let

be the smallest

(36)

and let

be the truncated degree distribution of

by

treating all variable nodes with degree greater than as pilot

bits. Then the degree distribution pair

achieves a fraction

of the channel capacity with vanishing bit error probability

under BP decoding.

Proof: See Appendix C-B.

The decoding complexity per information bit of this checkregular ensemble can be calculated as follows:

(37)

which approaches the bounded value as approaches 0. Theorem 5: (Variable-regular ensemble) Let (38)

which approaches the bounded value as approaches 0.

One drawback of these capacity-achieving degree distribu-

tion pairs is that they are not guaranteed to be valid, i.e., with

only nonnegative coefficients, for all

. Thus, it is not

clear if there exist capacity-achieving check-regular ensembles

with bounded complexity for the BEC with erasure probability

(respectively, variable-regular ensembles for the

BEC with erasure probability

). However, since this

is true for in the vicinity of 1 (which is not true for the ca-

pacity-achieving IRA codes in [8]), it is possible to construct

capacity-achieving ensembles with bounded complexity for any

by considering punctured LDPC-GM codes. The idea is to

construct a low-rate capacity-achieving code for a bad (i.e.,

close to 1) BEC channel, and then use puncturing to increase its

rate. In [44], it is shown that random puncturing results in no

performance loss on the gap to capacity for codes on the BEC.

It follows that puncturing can be used to increase the rate of

LDPC-GM codes without affecting their capacity-achievability,

a fact that was also observed by Pfister and Sason [26]. Fur-

thermore, since a punctured LDPC-GM ensemble can also be

viewed as another unpunctured LDPC-GM ensemble with inner

irregular LDGM code (which is no longer rate-1 in general), we

have the following theorem.

Theorem 6: Let

be a degree distribution pair implied

by Theorem 4 or Theorem 5 for some given and . Consider

the LDPC-GM ensemble, whose outer LDPC code has degree

distribution pair , and inner LDGM code has degree dis-

tribution pair from the node perspective

5. Then for any

given

, if

(43a)

(43b)

(39)

M   ;  t dt 3 ( ) exists for all 2 (0 1) since

= ( ) = , which

M  means

can be made arbitrarily close to 0 by increasing ( ).

M   ;  4 ( ) exists for all 2 (0 1) since

= 1, which means

 M  can be made arbitrarily close to 0 by increasing ( ).

F5 is allowed to have the zero degree term, which denotes the fraction of

state nodes that are only connected to the check nodes in the LDPC part and not

connected to any check nodes in the LDGM part in Fig. 5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1002

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

then this LDPC-GM ensemble achieves a fraction of of the attributed to the presence of the rate-1 LDGM encoder, which

channel capacity on the BEC with erasure probability

helps to eliminate high weight codewords while maintaining a

under BP decoding. Proof: See Appendix C-D.

vanishingly small amount of low weight codewords in the LDPC code. The implication of the above statement is that these codes

According to this theorem, given any capacity-achieving

degree distribution pair

for some erasure probability ,

we can generate capacity-achieving LDPC-GM ensembles for

all erasure probabilities

by adjusting . Since can

be arbitrarily close to 1, and the maximum degrees of and

are still 2, this construction can produce capacity-achieving

LDPC-GM ensembles for all BECs with bounded decoding

complexity.

achieve the Gilbert–Varshamov bound with asymptotically high probability.
Furthermore, after applying the ML decoding performance bound given in [16] to these LDPC-GM codes, we proved that they can achieve capacity on any MBIOS channel using ML decoding. Since all these results hinged on the condition that is greater than some finite number, we have proved that these LDPC-GM codes are capacity-achieving codes with bounded

graphical complexity on any MBIOS channel. Note that, the

V. CONCLUSION

concept in the proof of the capacity achieving result for the LDPC-GM codes is exactly the same as that in the proof of [10,

In this paper, we first studied some fundamental properties of IRA codes, and then introduced LDPC-GM codes, which were proved to be capacity-achieving on the BEC and MBIOS channels using BP and ML decoding, respectively, with bounded graphical complexity. These LDPC-GM codes are the first reported ensembles that achieve capacity on MBIOS channels with bounded graphical complexity.
We first derived the asymptotic growth rate of the AAWD of IRA codes. In the process, we also derived the AAWD of the systematic and nonsystematic LDGM codes, and proved that nonsystematic regular LDGM codes are free of rate reduction with asymptotically high probability. By numerically evaluating the AAWD of the ensembles, we concluded that: (a) the accumulator code plays an important role in eliminating low weight codewords for IRA ensembles; (b) the nonsystematic regular IRA ensembles have more concentrated AAWD’s than their corresponding systematic ones with the same graphical complexity; (c) the nonsystematic regular IRA ensembles with moderate check node degrees have AAWD’s very close to that of the random ensemble for all growth rate values greater than zero. The bit SNR thresholds on the BIAWGN channel based on Divsalar’s bound were obtained to show that nonsystematic regular IRA ensembles with small check node degrees have a better guaranteed ML decoding performance than the corresponding systematic regular IRA and regular LDPC ensembles with the same graphical complexity, which is only at most 0.124 dB away from the Shannon limit. However, although these promising results made nonsystematic IRA ensembles strong candidates for capacity-achieving codes on noisy channels with bounded graphical complexity, the fact that they do not have linearly increasing minimum distance (as proved in [40]) prevents this statement from being rigorously proved.
Motivated by this reason, LDPC-GM codes, i.e., concate-

Theorem 2.2], where the regular LDPC codes were proved to achieve capacity under ML decoding when the graphical complexity grows to infinite. Although, the graphical complexity of the regular LDPC codes scales similarly as the information theoretical lower bound given by [10, Theorem 2.1] for all binary linear codes representable by a bipartite graph with variable and check nodes, it can not stay bounded when the codes become capacity achieving due to the lack of state nodes in its graphical representation. It is thus evident that the introduction of the inner LDGM codes, which introduces state nodes in the graph as shown in Fig. 5, is the key difference between this paper and all previous results that enables us to prove the capacity achieving result with a bounded graphical complexity of the codes. Finally, if the outer LDPC code is allowed to be irregular, then invoking the density evolution method, we showed two particular ensembles of the LDPC-GM codes to be capacity-achieving on the BEC under BP decoding with bounded decoding complexity. Moreover, extensions valid for all erasure probabilities of the BEC using inner irregular LDGM codes were also presented.
These favorable results could suggest high potential for the LDPC-GM codes to achieve capacity on MBIOS channels with bounded decoding complexity per iteration. This remains an open problem mainly due to the fact that the only available method for studying the performance of turbo-like codes under BP is density evolution, which becomes ineffective as an analytical tool in MBIOS channels. Even if this problem could be solved, another open problem arises: since the required number of iterations for successful iterative decoding for the LDPC-GM codes as a function of the gap to capacity remains unknown (a fact that is true also for all other known capacity-achieving codes), it is not clear whether bounded graphical complexity property implies bounded decoding complexity using iterative decoding.

nated codes with an outer LDPC code and an inner LDGM code,

were introduced. In the case that the outer code is a Gallager’s

LDPC code and the inner code is a rate-

reg-

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THEOREM 2

ular LDGM code, we proved that for any desired range of rates Fix an and pick an arbitrary

.

, there always exists an integer

such that if

, 1) Define

then the resulting AAWD of the LDPC-GM codes has a positive

part, which can be upper bounded by the AAWD of the random

ensemble, and a negative part, where the number of codewords

vanishes at least polynomially in when . This result was

(44)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HSU AND ANASTASOPOULOS: CAPACITY-ACHIEVING CODES WITH BOUNDED GRAPHICAL COMPLEXITY

1003

We will bound in two cases. Case (a): Let

it follows that the maximum of

is attained at

, and thus

and for all
and

(45a)

(45b)

. By Fact 5, if

then

. Therefore, for

, we have

(46a) (46b)

(52)

Based on the above two cases, we have shown that for a

fixed and an arbitrary

,

there exists an

such that for all

and for all LDPC-GM ensembles with

we have

(53a) (53b)

where the first inequality follows from the fact that

relative entropy is always nonnegative [45, Theorem

2.6.3], and the second inequality follows from Fact 3.

Case (b):

. We have from Fact 4 that

(47a)
(47b) where the last inequality follows from (22). Since
(48)

For

we have

and

,

which implies

. For

we have

and

. Since

for all

,

must

intersect with

at some

. This is true since

is a monotonically decreasing

function w.r.t for all

.

Thus for all

,

. In addition, for all

,

. This

concludes the proof of the first statement of the

theorem.

2) For all

and

, we have

and (54a)

(49a)
(49b) (49c)
which can be made arbitrarily close to 0 for a large enough , there exists an such that

(54b)

(50) Furthermore, since

(54c)
(54d) (54e)

In (54), (a) follows from the fact that

(51a)

since it is a probability; (b) follows from Fact 3; (c) follows from (52); (d) follows from the fact that

(51b)

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1004

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

APPENDIX B PROOF OF Theorem 3

Proof: [8, Lemma 1] shows that under the assumed conditions, we have

Let be as defined in Theorem 2 for

. Moreover,

let

, and be its complementary set. The

following upper bound on the average block error probability

(62)

under ML decoding is given in [16]

where is the random coding exponent, and

(55)

A) Proof of Theorem 4: The facts that

satisfies (32)

for all

and that has only nonnegative coefficients

for

and

are proved in [8, Theorem 1]. By the

definition of , we have effectively

(56)

(63)

(57)

is the Bhattacharya parameter, where

and

are the

conditional probability density functions of the output of the

MBIOS channel given the input. We will apply this bound to

the LDPC-GM ensemble with

,

, and

in the density evolution equations. Hence, it follows that

, and the corresponding

for all

. Therefore, (33) is satisfied, which implies that the

BP decoding is successful. To find the rate of this ensemble of

codes, let

(64)

(58)
where is as defined in Theorem 2. Regarding the first term, we have from Theorem 2 that

be the fraction of pilot nodes. Then, we have

(65a)

(59) Regarding the second term, we have from the same theorem and Lemma 2 that
where the last equality follows from the facts that , and Lemma 3. But, from (30)
(60a)
(60b) (60c)

(65b) (65c)
,
(66a) (66b)

Hence (61)

(66c)

which converges to 0 as approaches infinity for all

and

. Thus, the theorem is proved.

APPENDIX C PROOFS OF SECTION IV
First, we need a lemma.

Therefore, it follows that

, and the theorem

is proved.

B) Proof of Theorem 5: The facts that

satisfies (32)

for all

and that has only nonnegative coefficients

for

are proved in [8, Theorem 2]. Since

for all

, (33) is satisfied and the BP decoding is

successful. As for the rate of this ensemble of codes, we have

Lemma 3: If the degree distribution pair

satisfies

,

, and satisfies (32) for all

, then

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(67a)

HSU AND ANASTASOPOULOS: CAPACITY-ACHIEVING CODES WITH BOUNDED GRAPHICAL COMPLEXITY

1005

(67b)

(67c)

(67d)

(67e)

(67f)

where (a) follows from the facts that

,

, and

Lemma 3. Hence, the theorem is proved.

C) Proof of Theorem 6: Let be the degree distribution

from the edge perspective corresponding to . We have

(68)

and the following set of density evolution equations:
(69a) (69b) (69c) (69d)
where denotes the channel erasure probability. After some algebraic manipulations, the fixed point equation can be shown to be

(70)

which is the same as (32) if we let the erasure probability be . Hence, from Theorem 4 and Theorem 5, the
decoding is successful under BP decoding on the BEC with erasure probability . Moreover, the rate of this ensemble is given by

rate of the outer LDPC code number of input nodes in the LDGM code number of check nodes in the LDGM code (71a)

rate of the outer LDPC code

(71b)

(71c)
(71d)
which then proves this theorem.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, El Paso, TX, May 1997, pp. 150–159.
[3] M. A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching channel capacity,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory its Appl., Honolulu, HI, Nov. 1999, pp. 65–76.

[4] A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. : SpringerVerlag, 2000, vol. 123, IMA umes in Math. Appl., pp. 153–166.
[5] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Cappacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002.
[6] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. J. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[7] I. Sason and R. Urbanke, “Complexity versus performance of capacity-achieving irregular repeat-accumulate codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1247–1256, Jun. 2004.
[8] H. D. Pfister, I. Sason, and R. Urbanke, “Capacity-achieving ensembles for the binary erasure channel with bounded complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2352–2379, Jul. 2005.
[9] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[10] I. Sason and R. Urbanke, “Parity-check density versus performance of binary linear block codes over memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1611–1635, Jul. 2003.
[11] T. J. R. S.-Y. Chung and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[12] S.-Y. Chung, D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[13] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[14] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for “turbolike” codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comp., IL, Sep. 1998, pp. 201–210.
[15] D. Divsalar, A Simple Tight Bound on Error Probability of Block Codes With Application to Turbo Codes Jet Propulsion Labs., Pasadena, CA, 1999, Tech. Rep. TMO Progress Report 42-139.
[16] G. Miller and D. Burshtein, “Bounds on the maximum-likelihood decoding error probability of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2696–2710, Nov. 2001.
[17] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, “Accumulate-repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, pp. 692–702, Apr. 2007.
[18] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, “Belief-propagation with information correction: Improved near maximum-likelihood decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun. 2004, p. 343.
[19] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 439–454, Mar. 2004.
[20] G. Poltyrev, “Bounds on the decoding error probability of binary linear codes via their spectra,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1284–1292, Jul. 1994.
[21] N. Shulman and M. Feder, “Random coding techniques for nonrandom codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2101–2104, Sep. 1999.
[22] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 2551–2567, Jun. 2006.
[23] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, Protograph Based LDPC Codes with Minimum Distance Linearly Growing with Block Size, vol. 3, pp. 1152–1156, Nov. 2005.
[24] I. Kanter and D. Saad, “Finite-size effects and error-free communication in gaussian channels,” J. Phys. A: Math. General, vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1675–1681, 2000.
[25] L. Ping and K. Y. Wu, “Concatenated tree codes: A low-complexity, high-performance approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 791–799, Feb. 2001.
[26] H. D. Pfister and I. Sason, “Accumulate-repeat-accumulate codes: Capacity-achieving ensembles of systematic codes for the erasure channel with bounded complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2088–2115, Jun. 2007.
[27] E. Soljanin, N. Varnica, and P. Whiting, “Raptor codes for hybrid ARQ,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comp., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2006.
[28] A. Brown, M. Luby, and A. Shokrollahi, “Repeat-accumulate codes that approach the Gilbert-Varshamov bound,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 169–173.
[29] A. Barg and G. Zemor, “Distance properties of expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 78–90, Jan. 2006.
[30] M. El-Khamy and R. J. McEliece, “The partition weight enumerator of MDS codes and its applications,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory ISIT 2005, Sep. 4–9, 2005, pp. 926–930.
[31] C. Di, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Weight distribution of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 4839–4855, Nov. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1006

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2010

[32] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[33] C.-H. Hsu and A. Anastasopoulos, “Capacity-achieving codes with bounded graphical complexity on noisy channels,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comp., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2005.
[34] R. Ikegaya, K. Kasai, Y. Shimoyama, T. Shibuya, and K. Sakaniwa, “Stopping set distributions of two-edge type LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory ISIT 2005, Sep. 4–9, 2005, pp. 985–989.
[35] K. Kasai, Y. Shimoyama, T. Shibuya, and K. Sakaniwa, “Average coset weight distribution of multi-edge type LDPC code ensembles,” IEICE Trans. Fundam. Electron. Commun. Comput. Sci., vol. E89-A, no. 10, pp. 2519–2525, 2006.
[36] T. Wadayama, “Average coset weight distribution of combined ldpc matrix ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 4856–4866, Nov. 2006.
[37] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115–1131, Jun. 2004.
[38] O. Pretzel, Error-Correcting Codes and Finite Fields. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1992.
[39] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: Asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[40] L. M. J. Bazzi and S. K. Mitter, “Encoding complexity versus minimum distance,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 2103–2112, Jun. 2005.
[41] S. Shamai and I. Sason, “Variations on the Gallager bounds, connections, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3029–3051, Dec. 2002.
[42] C.-H. Hsu and A. Anastasopoulos, “Capacity achieving LDPC codes through puncturing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, pp. 4698–4706, Oct. 2008.
[43] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[44] H. Pishro-Nik, N. Rahnavard, and F. Fekri, “Nonuniform error correction using low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2702–2714, Jul. 2005.
[45] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley , 1991.
Chun-Hao Hsu was born in Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1978. He received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2000, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in 2004 and 2006, respectively.
He is currently a Senior Engineer with Qualcomm Inc., Santa Clara, CA.
Achilleas Anastasopoulos (S’97–M’99) was born in Athens, Greece, in 1971. He received the Diploma in electrical engineering from the National Technical University of Athens, in 1993, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from University of Southern California, Los Angeles, in 1994 and 1999, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. His research interests lie in the general area of communication theory, with emphasis in channel coding, multiuser channels, and connections between communications and control. He is the coauthor of the book Iterative Detection: Adaptivity, Complexity Reduction, and Applications (Reading, MA: Kluwer Academic, 2001).
Dr. Anastasopoulos is the recipient of the “Myronis Fellowship” in 1996 from the Graduate School at the University of Southern California, and the NSF CAREER Award in 2004. He served as a technical program committee member for ICC 2003 and Globecom 2004, and currently serves on the editorial board of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

