IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 56, NO. 1, MARCH 2010

103

Improved Decoding Algorithm of Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation for LDPC Code
Ying Wang, Lei Xie, Member, IEEE, Huifang Chen, Member, IEEE, and Kuang Wang

Abstract—Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation (BICM), which has been proven to be powerful when applied in Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Sum-Product} Algorithm (SPA) decoder, is a bandwidth efficient coding scheme. However, the BICM-SPA decoder does not take the statistical dependencies between bits from the same -ary modulated symbol into account so that it cannot converge to the Maximum A-Posteriori (MAP) decoding algorithm. In this paper, an improved SPA decoding algorithm for the LDPC code, which combines decoding and demodulation, is proposed. The proposed decoding algorithm, referred to as the BICM-ISPA, is based on generalized distributive law Generalized Distributive Law and derived from the generalized symbol SPA under certain rational assumptions. And the BICM-ISPA can asymptotically converge to the MAP decoding solution algorithm. Simulation results show that the BICM-ISPA decoder jointly optimizes the decoding error performance and the computational complexity of the LDPC code over the additive white Gaussian noise channel. Compared with the BICM-SPA decoder, the advantage of the BICM-ISPA is quite significant with a large modulation size and in the scenario where Gray mapping cannot be used.
Index Terms—Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation (BICM), Generalized Distributive Law (GDL), Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) code, Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA).
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY Parity-Check (LDPC) code was proposed by Gallager [1] in 1960s. Since Mackay and Neal introduced the bipartite Tanner Graph [2] into the LDPC code [3], LDPC code and its decoding algorithms have been developed vigorously. The most attractive feature of the LDPC code is the outstanding capacity on noisy channels at relatively low complexity with iterative decoding algorithms. Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) [4], the most efficient iterative decoding algorithm of the LDPC code, can approach the Shannon limit performance at long code length [5]. Many SPA-based simplified algorithms with different purposes, such as reducing the computational complexity, improving the iterative convergence and simplifying the hardware implementation, have been proposed [6]–[8]. Due to the LDPC code’s superior properties, it has been adopted as the forward error correction technique for the reliable high-speed data transmission in many applications, such as DVB-S2 [9], and also, many decoding methods aimed at this system were proposed [10].
Manuscript received July 23, 2009; revised October 06, 2009. First published December 22, 2009; current version published February 24, 2010 This work was supported in part by the Science and Technology Department of Zhejiang Province under No. 2008C21088 and No. 2008C13081.
The authors are with the Department of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: longxiaojing@zju.edu.cn; xiel@zju.edu.cn; chenhf@zju.edu.cn; wangk@zju.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2009.2036950

As we known, the coded modulation is an efficient way

for achieving both the favorable power and the bandwidth

efficiency in the modern communication system. The Bit-Inter-

leaved Coded Modulation (BICM) [11], [12], which implements

a serial concatenation of the binary error-correcting coding,

bit-by-bit interleaving and high-ary modulation mapping, is

a popular efficient bandwidth scheme. Due to the bit-by-bit

interleaving between encoder and modulation in the BICM

transmitter, a true Maximum A-Posteriori (MAP) decoder of

the BICM system requires joint demodulation and decoding,

which leads to the high complexity. Hence, a suboptimal

decoder is employed in the traditional BICM system. The

BICM-SPA decoder proposed by Zehavi [11] implements in

two steps: First, the Log-Likelihood Ratios (LLRs) of coded

bits with considering the modulation and the channel influence

on the bits originated from modulated symbols at the demodu-

lator are computed. Second, a binary SPA decodes the LLRs of

bit metrics as if they are observations at a Binary Phase Shift

Keying (BPSK) channel output. Since the BICM-SPA ignores

the correlation between bits from the same modulated symbol

in the iterative decoding process, it cannot converge to the MAP

algorithm. The gap between the BICM capacity

and the modulation capacity

becomes

wide as the modulation size increases [12], [13]. This capacity

gap can be minimized by using Gray mapping or other con-

stellation mapping schemes based on Gray mapping [14]–[17].

However, because of the high sensitivity to the modulation

mapping, the BICM-SPA does not behave well when Gray

mapping cannot be strictly satisfied, such as 32 Quadrature

Amplitude Modulation (QAM) [18]. And the bit-error-rate

(BER) performance degrades rigorously [19].

The generalized symbol SPA, which introduces symbol

nodes into the Tanner graph and combines demodulation with

decoding, is the optimal MAP decoding algorithm for high

order coded modulation systems [20]. The generalized symbol

SPA decodes -ary modulated the LDPC code based on the

symbols’ A Posteriori Probability (APP). Compared with the

BICM-SPA, it obtains better BER performance at the ex-

pense of high decoding complexity. Therefore, the generalized

symbol SPA is unpractical for a BICM system. Although the

iterative decoding (BICM-ID) [21]–[24] is an efficient way

to get excellent BER performance, it inevitably brings about

extra computational complexity and decoding latency into the

BICM-SPA decoder.

Motivated by relatively low complexity of the BICM-SPA

and the optimal decoding performance of generalized symbol

SPA, an improved SPA decoding algorithm for the LDPC BICM

system is proposed in this paper. Derived from the general-

ized symbol SPA based on Generalized Distributive Law (GDL)

[25], the proposed algorithm implements demodulation and de-

coding jointly and is referred as the BICM-ISPA. The BICM-

0018-9316/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 56, NO. 1, MARCH 2010

Fig. 1. The model of the LDPC BICM system.

ISPA asymptotically converges to the optimal MAP algorithm while it has a much lower decoding complexity in comparison with the generalized symbol SPA. The advantages of the BICMISPA become particularly significant with large modulation size and in the scenario where Gray mapping cannot be used.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The system model and related decoding algorithms are introduced in Section II. Section III presents our proposed BICM-ISPA. Simulation results and discussions are given in Section IV. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section V.

TABLE I THE NOTATION LIST FOR BINARY MODULATION

II. BACKGROUND

A. LDPC Code

LDPC code is a linear block code with length and rate

, defined by an

sparse parity-check

matrix . It can also be depicted by a bipartite graph known

as the Tanner graph constructed from the parity-check matrix

with bit nodes and parity-check nodes. Bit nodes and

parity-check nodes represent coded bits and parity-check con-

straints, respectively. The parity-check node and the bit node

are connected in the bipartite Tanner graph only when the cor-

responding matrix entry is non-zero.

C. SPA Algorithm

The binary SPA for the LDPC code is a message passing al-

gorithm which passes messages iteratively between bit nodes

and parity-check nodes in the bipartite Tanner graph. It can be

simplified into the log-SPA by passing LLR messages instead

of probabilistic messages.

The notations used in the paper is listed in Table I.

For the binary modulation (i.e.

), the SPA decoding

scheme is summarized as follows.

B. System Description

Initialization: For

,

An LDPC BICM system is shown in Fig. 1. A sequence of

binary encoded bits from the LDPC encoder is bit-inter-

leaved by the random interleaver and mapped into a sequence

of -ary symbols

, where

is the

signal constellations,

,

, and is the number

of bits per symbol. are transmitted over the discrete equiv-

Iteration:

(parity-check node update) At the th iteration, for each

and each

, compute

alent additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. More

specifically, the codeword is assigned into groups of

bits, i.e.

, with

. Each is mapped to a symbol

and

transmitted over the AWGN channel. The channel output of

is denoted by

, where represents the (bit node update) For each , compute

channel white Gaussian noise with mean zero and variance

per dimension. At the receiver, the demodulator processes the

received complex symbols to obtain a priori log-likelihood

ratios (LLRs) of the bit metrics, de-interleaves and applies them

into a binary SPA decoder to output .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 56, NO. 1, MARCH 2010
W m Fig. 2. A simple example of ( ) in the coded modulation graph.

105

to represent that the

parity-check constraint is satisfied in the coded modulation

graph, where is the binary modulo-2 sum. For a simple

example shown in Fig. 2, when the degree of parity-check node

in the coded modulation graph is 4,

means that

the parity-check constraint

should be

satisfied.

The generalized symbol SPA is summarized as follows.

Decision:

is obtained by quantizing

such that

if

,

and

if

. If

, the algorithm

halts with

as the output of the decoder; otherwise, the

algorithm goes to Iteration. If the algorithm does not halt

within the predefined maximum iteration number, a decoder

failure is declared.

The initialization of the BICM-SPA decoder is different from

the binary SPA because the modulation information from neigh-

boring bits in the same modulated symbol must be considered.

When the binary SPA is applied to a BICM system, initial-

ized LLR values of demodulated binary bits correlate to the

channel conditional probability density function and a-priori

symbol probabilities. Let

be the initialized local cost

of bit , where is the received symbol of demodulator. For

and

, the initialization is given by

Initialization: For

,

(2)

Iteration:

(parity-check node update) At the th iteration, for each

and each

, compute

(3)

(bit node update) For each , (4) (5)

Decision: Obtain

according to

Other decoding steps are the same as the binary SPA decoding scheme.

D. Generalized Symbol SPA

The SPA can be extended to employ constellation symbol in

the iterative decoding step, which is theoretically optimal MAP

decoding scheme for the BICM system [20]. Considering an

-ary modulation system, each -bit is mapped into a symbol

word

, where and denote the inphase

and quadrature components of , respectively. The input of

the decoder is a random vector

, where

, and and are both random variables with

variance and mean and , respectively. Then, the ini-

tialized local cost function of initialized symbol node is

(1)

From the relationship between bits and symbols ,

is obtained. If

, the algorithm halts and is

the output of the decoder; otherwise, the algorithm goes to Iteration. If the algorithm does not halt within the predefined maximum number of iterations, a decoder failure is declared.

The generalized symbol SPA achieves an excellent BER per-

formance as it decodes code words combined with demodula-

tion, considers the statistical correlations between bits from the

same modulated symbols. However, it also incurs excessively

high decoding complexity. The computational complexity of the

generalized symbol SPA increases exponentially with

,

where is the modulation size, and

is the degree of the

th parity-check node.

For the BICM system, the coded modulation graph consists

III. IMPROVED SYMBOL SPA ALGORITHM

of symbol nodes composed of bits originating from Although the generalized symbol SPA can achieve the op-

. Let

be the index of the bit node in timal decoding performance, it imposes excessively high com-

the symbol node . Bit corresponds to one and only plexity. On the other hand, the BICM-SPA decoder is computa-

one bit node in the original Tanner Graph. For a selected tionally simple, but its capacity is smaller than the modulation

parity-check node , let

be the set of bits in symbol capacity since it ignores the statistical correlation between bits

node , which are connected with the th parity-check originating from the same modulated symbol. Certainly, this gap

node in the Tanner graph. Then, we use a simple notation can be minimized by using Gray mapping [12]. However, for a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 56, NO. 1, MARCH 2010

large modulation size and/or in the situation where Gray mapping cannot be utilized, the performance degradation is considerable. Motivated by the excellent performance of the generalized symbol SPA and the computational simplicity of the BICMSPA, we propose an improved symbol SPA (BICM-ISPA) derived and simplified from the generalized symbol SPA based on the GDL [25] under certain reasonable assumptions.
For an LDPC code, the distribution of 1s in the sparse paritycheck matrix is dispersed to achieve good BER performance. In order to attain cycle-free graph and a large minimum hamming distance between code words as possible, the number of modulated symbols, which have more than one bit connected to a same parity-check node, is very small. Sometimes this number can even be neglected compared to the total number of modulated symbols as the code length increases. We partition modulated symbols into two groups. The first group are the symbols unilateral connected to parity-check nodes, most of the modulated symbols belong to this group. In the second group, symbols have more than one edge, that is, more than one bit in a same symbol node are connected to the same parity-check node.

Then, (8) can be expressed as

(9) According to the Jacobi logarithm equation,
. Then,

When (1) is converted to the logarithm domain without the

minus sign, i.e.

,

can be calculated as

A. Unilateral Connected Case

When symbol nodes have one bit connected to the parity-

check node, the value of

is only affected by the bit

in the symbol node connected to the parity-check node

. Hence,

takes two values,

and

. As the generalized symbol SPA is defined in

the sum-product commutative semi ring, the GDL [25] can be

adopted to give a fast algorithm for computing

, and

(3) can be computed as follows.

Define
Then, the BICM-ISPA decoder for an LDPC code is described as follows.

(6)

Initialization: For

,

(7)

(10)

For the values of each

only take two states, the sim-

plification to the logarithm domain can be realized. Define

Iteration:

(parity-check node update) At the th iteration, for each

and each

, compute

Then, we have (11)

Further define

(bit node update) For each , compute

(8)

(12)

(13)

Decision: Obtain

according to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 56, NO. 1, MARCH 2010

107
TABLE II COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY PER DECODING ITERATION

m Fig. 3. 8PSK modulated symbols containing dual edges connected to the
parity-check node .

From the relationship between bits and symbols ,

is obtained. If

, the algorithm halts and is

the output of the decoder; otherwise, the algorithm goes to

Iteration. If the algorithm does not halt within the predefined

maximum number of iterations, a decoder failure is declared.

B. Multi-Edge Connected Case

When more than one bit in a symbol node are connected Fig. 4. The comparison of the BER performance over AWGN channel with to a parity-check node , the parity-check node updating needs different modulation modes.

some modifications. Fig. 3 shows a simplified parity-check con-

straint which contains dual edges in the symbol node con-

nected to the parity-check node . Obviously, the parity-check

constraint

in Fig. 3 is

the total number of modulated symbols, only the unilateral connected case need to be considered. The influence of neglecting multi-edge connected case can be asymptotically self-repaired

(14) in the course of iterative message passing decoding. The comparison of the computational complexity per de-

When

holds, it means that (14) must be satisfied.

Suppose that

is updated and the value of in

(14) is fixed, if (14) is not satisfied,

can be fulfilled by

flipping one of the rest bits, , and . Since the operation

of the BICM-ISPA is based on the symbol node, dual edges

in the symbol need to be jointly considered. and are

combined as a new “bit” by making

in the case of

coding iteration between the generalized symbol SPA and the

BICM-ISPA is listed in Table II. From Table II, we can observe

that the complexity of the BICM-ISPA only increases linearly

as and

increase, whereas the generalized symbol SPA

increases exponentially with

. Therefore, the proposed

BICM-ISPA is efficient, especially for large and .

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

and

in the case of

.

Then,

can be fulfilled by flipping or .

More than 2-edge connected cases can be deduced in the same

way. When multi-edge is considered, the parity-check node up-

dating of the BICM-ISPA is

Our simulation results are obtained over the AWGN channel based on the LDPC codes with code lengths of 16200 and 64800 provided in DVB-S2 [9], and a short regular LDPC code with code length of 504 provided by Mackay in the online encyclopedia of sparse graph codes [26]. The predefined maximum

number of iterations for both the BICM-SPA and the BICM-

(15) ISPA is 50. Fig. 4 shows the BER performance of the BICM-SPA and the

BICM-ISPA over the AWGN channel with 16QAM, 32QAM

where

and 64QAM. The corresponding Shannon limits and the performance of the optimal MAP algorithm, i.e. the generalized

symbol SPA are given as well. From Fig. 4, we observe that the

performance improvements of our proposed BICM-ISPA over

the BICM-SPA are about 0.12dB and 0.2dB for 16QAM and

64QAM systems with Gray mapping, respectively. Compared

means that the number of 1s in with the BICM-SPA, the BER performance of the BICM-ISPA

the symbol node connected to the parity-check node is is more approaching to the Shannon limit, and the performance

odd (even).

gap between the BICM-ISPA and the optimal MAP algorithm

Owing to the low density of the LDPC code, the number of is also smaller. Moreover, when 32QAM is adopted, the BICM-

modulated symbols with multi-edge is small. When the number ISPA achieves about 0.5dB improvement over the BICM-SPA.

of symbols with multi-edge is small enough in comparison with The reason for this phenomenon is that in the 32QAM system,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 56, NO. 1, MARCH 2010

Fig. 5. The comparison of the BER performance over 64QAM AWGN channel

with different code rates.

Fig. 7. The comparison of the BER performance over 16QAM AWGN channel

with different mapping schemes.

Fig. 6. The comparison of the BER performance over 16QAM AWGN channel with different code lengths.

Fig. 8. The average iteration numbers over 16QAM AWGN channel with different mapping schemes.

Gray mapping can not be satisfied strictly (which is actually

a quasi-Gray mapping), the superiority of the BICM-ISPA be- and Ungerboeck’s set partitioning mapping. From Fig. 7, we ob-

comes distinct.

serve that the BER performance of the BICM-SPA degraded sig-

Fig. 5 shows the BER performance of the BICM-SPA and the nificantly in the case of non-Gray mapping. However, the BER

BICM-ISPA over 64QAM AWGN channel with different code performance of the BICM-ISPA degrades slightly in the case of

rates. From Fig. 5, we observe that the BICM-ISPA outperforms non-Gray mapping, and it still can approach the performance

the BICM-SPA with different code rates.

of the case with Gray mapping. And the performance gap be-

Fig. 6 shows the BER performance of the BICM-SPA and tween the BICM-SPA and the BICM-ISPA is about 1.5dB in

the BICM-ISPA over 16QAM AWGN channel when the code the non-Gray mapping case. Since the BICM-ISPA is insensi-

lengths are 504, 16200 and 64800, respectively. And the corre- tive to the mapping scheme, it offers outstanding robustness to

sponding Shannon limits are given as well. The Shannon limit the performance degradation when the impact of statistical de-

of rate 0.5 is related to the LDPC codes with lengths of 504 pendencies between modulated bits cannot be neglected.

and 64800, and the other Shannon limit is related to the LDPC Fig. 8 shows the average iteration numbers of the BICM-SPA

code with length 16200, whose effective code rate provided and the BICM-ISPA over the 16QAM AWGN channel with

by DVB-S2 is 0.44 other than 0.5. From Fig. 6, we observe Gray mapping and Ungerboeck’s set partitioning mapping. The

that the performance of our proposed BICM-ISPA is better than curves in Fig. 8 are depicted by calculating the average iteration

that of the BICM-SPA with different code lengths. When the numbers of transmitted frames in certain selected SNR values.

code length increases, the BER performance of the BICM-ISPA Obviously, in terms of the iterative decoding convergence speed,

improves.

the BICM-ISPA achieves required BER performance with less

Fig. 7 shows the BER performance of the BICM-SPA and the iterations than that of the BICM-SPA. The difference of desir-

BICM-ISPA over 16QAM AWGN channel with Gray mapping able iteration number between the BICM-ISPA with non-Gray

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 56, NO. 1, MARCH 2010

109

mapping and the BICM-SPA with Gray mapping is about 10, while the difference between the BICM-SPA with Gray mapping and non-Gray mapping is more than 30. And from Figs. 7 and 8, we observe that the BICM-ISPA can guarantee good BER performance with different mapping schemes without extra decoding iterations.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, an improved symbol SPA (referred as the BICM-ISPA) has been proposed for the LDPC code over
-ary modulated AWGN channel. Since the algorithm is derived from the generalized symbol SPA by performing its iterative course with combining demodulation and decoding, the BICM-ISPA can converge to the optimal MAP algorithm in high order coded modulation systems. In other words, the BICM-ISPA decodes the bits with considering the statistical dependencies of bits originating from the same -ary modulated symbols. Hence, it can provide better performance in comparison with the BICM-SPA. Furthermore, we have proved that the proposed algorithm has lower computational complexity per decoding iteration compared with the general symbol SPA. Simulation results show that the performance of our proposed BICM-ISPA is better than that of the BICM-SPA with different modulation modes, code rates and code lengths. Simulation results also show that, due to the insensitivity to bits mapping, the BICM-ISPA offers more powerful robustness to the performance degradation which incurred by the statistical dependencies between modulated bits. And it guarantees the BER performance unaffected in the different constellation mapping schemes without extra iterations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[3] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, 1999.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, 2001.
[5] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, 2001.
[6] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1036–1036E.

[7] N. Varnica, M. Fossorier, M. Inc, and C. Santa Clara, “Improvements in belief-propagation decoding based on averaging information from decoder and correction of clusters of nodes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 846–848, 2006.
[8] Z. Yang, K. Peng, N. Jiang, C. Pan, and J. Song, “High-throughput QC-LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 251–259, Jun. 2009.
[9] “Digital video broadcasting (DVB); User guidelines for the second generation system for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broad-band satellite applications (DVB-S2),” Transl.: tR Patent 102,376, 2005.
[10] S. Papaharalabos, M. Papaleo, P. Mathiopoulos, M. Neri, A. VanelliCoralli, and G. Corazza, “DVB-S2 LDPC decoding using robust check node update approximations,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 120–126, Mar. 2008.
[11] E. Zehavi, “8-PSK trellis codes for a Rayleigh channel,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 873–884, 1992.
[12] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, 1998.
[13] U. Wachsmann, R. Fischer, and J. Huber, “Multilevel codes: theoretical concepts and practical design rules,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1361–1391, 1999.
[14] M. Baldi, F. Chiaraluce, and G. Cancellieri, “Finite-precision analysis of demappers and decoders for LDPC-coded M-QAM systems,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 239–250, Jun. 2009.
[15] Y. Li and W. Ryan, “Bit-reliability mapping in LDPC-coded modulation systems,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–3, 2005.
[16] R. Maddock and A. Banihashemi, “Reliability-based coded modulation with low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 403–406, 2006.
[17] G. Richter, A. Hof, and M. Bossert, “On the mapping of low-density parity-check codes for bit-interleaved coded modulation,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2007, pp. 2146–2150.
[18] Framing structure, Channel coding and modulation for digital television terrestrial broadcasting system, GB 20600-2006.
[19] Y. Nana, E. Sharon, and S. Litsyn, “Improved decoding of LDPC coded modulations,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 375–377, 2006.
[20] N. Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs. Linköping, Sweden: Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, 1996.
[21] X. Li and J. Ritcey, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding using soft feedback,” Electronics Letters, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 942–943, 1998.
[22] X. Li, A. Chindapol, and J. Ritcey, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding and 8 PSK signaling,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1250–1257, 2002.
[23] F. Schreckenbach, N. Gortz, J. Hagenauer, and G. Bauch, “Optimization of symbol mappings for bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 593–595, 2003.
[24] B. K. Khoo, S. Le Goff, B. Sharif, and C. Tsimenidis, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding using constellation shaping,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 1517–1520, 2006.
[25] S. Aji and R. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans.
2 Information Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325–343, 2000.
[26] “PEGReg252 504 (N = 504; K = 252; M = 252; R = 0:5),” Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Available: http://www. inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html#l62

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

