2024 2nd International Conference on Signal Processing and Intelligent Computing (SPIC) | 979-8-3503-6888-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/SPIC62469.2024.10691538

2024 2nd International Conference on Signal Processing and Intelligent Computing(SPIC)
Inception-ResNet Assisted Iterative Decoding

Algorithm Based on Alternating Direction Multiplier

Method

Cunrui Feng School of Information Science and
Engineering Shenyang Ligong University
Shenyang, China

Fan Zhou* School of Information Science and
Engineering Shenyang Ligong University
Shenyang, China zhoufan@sylu.edu.cn

Dengyun Cao School of Information Science and
Engineering Shenyang Ligong University
Shenyang, China

Abstract-The application of deep learning to channel decoding methods has gradually become a hot research topic. However, the high complexity of deep neural network (DNN) parameters hinders the application of deep neural networks to long codes, and the difficulty of decoding increases exponentially with the increase of code length. To address this problem, this paper proposes a low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding based on alternating direction multiplier method (ADMM) assisted by Inception-RestNet network. After passing through the channel with the noise codeword through the Inception-RestNet network to achieve the denoising process is input to the traditional ADMM decoder, and then according to the traditional this algorithm calculates the codeword with the original with the noise codeword to be processed and then go to reverse optimization of the denoising network, iterative operation between the Inception-RestNet and the hard verdict decoder can be reduce the effect of noise on the coded modulation system, thus enabling the decoder to obtain more accurate estimates. Experimental results show that the BER performance of this IR-ADMM decoder is improved by 0.5 dB with fewer iterations than the conventional LDPC decoder.
Keywords-LDPC codes , Linear decoding , Alternate Direction Multiplier Method (ADMM) , Iterative Detection Decoding Algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first proposed by Gallager [1], The initial LDPC code decoding methods mainly used Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm [2][3].which are characterized by high decoding throughput and BER close to the limit of Shannon's theorem. As a result, LDPC codes have become one of the research areas of interest in channel decoding code technology.Feldman et al. analyzed the channel decoding problem from a convex optimization point of view and proposed an innovative decoding algorithm, Linear Programming (LP) decoding algorithm, using a linear programming model [4]-[6]. This algorithm has the maximum likelihood certification property and is easy to model mathematically. However, the main problem of Linear Programming decoding algorithm is the high complexity. In particular, Barman proposed a linear programming decoding method based on Alternative Direction Method of Multiplier (ADMM) [7][8]for example, Nachmani et al. proposed a decoding method that combines Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm and deep learning decoding method [9]. The

method utilizes Tanner graphs to assign weight parameters to neural networks and uses neural network training to improve the performance of BP decoding; T. Gruber et al. used fully connected neural networks for channel decoding [10], and conducted decoding experiments for random and structured codewords. The results show that the neural network can learn the structural coding rules for decoding, and the decoding performance of the neural network model can reach the maximum a posteriori probabilistic decoding performance under certain coding methods.
A novel perspective to optimize decoding algorithms is proposed in the literature [11], by adopting a deep learning (DL) scheme to attenuate the impact of noise on the transmission performance from the perspective of noise, especially based on the properties of correlated noise. This approach aims to improve the transmission quality by utilizing deep learning techniques to enhance the transmission performance by reducing the degree of noise interference, which provides a better idea to further improve the algorithmic performance of ADMM.
In this paper, we propose an Inception-ResNet-assisted an iterative decoding model, which can effectively resist the noise in the channel, the sequence received at the receiver end is fed into the network to get the noise predicted by the network, the original received sequence is subtracted from the predicted noise, and the loop iterates the process to get the incompletely denoised sequence, and the incompletely denoised sequence can have a more excellent BER performance.
II. IRN-ADMM ITERATIVE DECODING MODEL
A. ADMM decoding method
LDPC codes belong to linear packet codes, and there exists a supervisory relationship in linear packet codes, which can be represented by a matrix, i.e., the supervisory matrix H. The supervisory matrix of LDPC belongs to the low-density check matrix, in which the number of “1s” in the matrix is sparse, and “1” in the matrix represents the positions of edges in the Tanner graph. “ represents the position of edges in the
Tanner graph, for example, a matrix is (m,n), then the check matrix H corresponds to the variable node index in the Tanner graph is I ,The checksum node index is J,If the check node I =

979-8-3503-6888-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

534

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:56:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1 and the variable node J = 2 are connected by edges, then the corresponding supervisory matrix in the H.The number of “1's” in each row of the supervisory matrix represents the out-degree d of the corresponding check node,The number of “1's” in each column of H represents the out-degree d of the corresponding variable node.
Let the original transmitting codeword x,the channel of transmission is a binary memoryless symmetric channel, and the receiving codeword after passing through the channel is, so the conditional probability of the transmitting codeword under this channel can be obtained, so the decoding problem can be turned into the following representation:
min  T x subject to x C

where is the negative log-likelihood ratio of the conditional probability, and C is the set of licensed codes corresponding to the LDPC, but this optimization problem is a problem solving an integer solution, and Feldman relaxes the integer to the real numbers, and the problem becomes as follows:
subject to Pj x  PPd j ,j  J
The above equation is represents a selection matrix with dimension, which serves the operation of selecting the bits involved in the checksum in the codeword at the jth checksum, and stores the selected information as a vector, then represents the set of convex packets of length corresponding to each row of the checksum matrix.
A precise mathematical description of the pairs is the key to LP decoding, some scholars precisely described the geometry and developed an efficient algorithm to project onto parity polyhedra, which is very important in subsequently solving the decoding efficiently via the alternating direction multiplier method. The projection algorithm is an important point of the ADMM_LP decoder we present here.
To bring the above optimal solution problem more in line with the ADMM framework, an equivalent form of the above problem is written:
min  T x

subject to j  J , Pj x = z j

z j  PPd j

Next we can write the augmented Lagrangian function for the above problem:

  L (x, z, ) =  T x +

m j =1

Tj

(Pj x

−

z

j

)

+

 2

m j =1

Pj x − z j

2 2

The median Lagrange multiplier in the above equation, a penalty term parameter, is a constant and constant greater than zero.Next, according to the iteration rule of ADMM, three variables (x,z,) are kept constant for two variables to update the remaining one, the process is as follows:

xk+1 = arg min L (x, zk , k )
x

zk+1 = arg min L (xk+1, z , k )
z

k +1

=

k

+

(Pj xk+1

−

z

k j

+1

)

The update of z-sum in the above iterative formula is independent of the problem f(x) and can be regarded as a constant, so the process of updating x is converted from the form of a vector to the form of a single element by fixing the other two variables and then applying the augmentation and generalization of the pull function to x in a partial derivation of the result equal to 0, and then obtaining the optimal solution for x:

  xi =

[0,1]

1 dj

 

    jNi

z(i) j

−

(i) j 

 −

i 

 

B. Deep Residual Networks and Inception Structures
In convolutional neural network (CNN) model, increasing the number of network layers can integrate image features at different levels of low, medium, and high, including local and global features and so on. Therefore, the more network layers, the richer the extracted image features and the higher the recognition accuracy. However, this increase in the number of network layers may lead to the problems of gradient vanishing and network degradation. Although some regularization methods have solved the gradient vanishing problem to a certain extent, when the number of network layers continues to increase, gradient vanishing still exists, which can lead to the occurrence of model degradation phenomenon. In order to solve this problem of deep networks, He et al. proposed the ResNet (Residual Network) network structure in 2016 [12].The ResNet network consists of multiple sets of residual network structures, each of which contains a number of residual learning modules (also known as residual blocks). A residual learning structure consists of multiple convolutional layers and shortcut connections (shortcut connections), where shortcut connections implement residual learning and can directly pass the output of a neuron in one layer across a multilayer network to one of the layers behind it. In the residual learning structure, the input is X and the output is H(X), which consists of two parts, the residual mapping function F(X) and the shortcut connection X, i.e., H(X) = F(X) + X. Here F(X) denotes the output of X on the main path. By training the parameters in the residual mapping function F(X), the residual network can learn to solve the degradation problems that occur in multilayer networks. When the model determines that the current residual block is a redundant layer, it trains the parameters of F(X) to 0, making the output of the structure the input X, thus realizing a constant mapping. Such a constant mapping can solve the network degradation problem that occurs in multilayer networks. Overall, ResNet enables deeper network training and better performance by introducing residual learning structures and shortcut connections, which allow information to be passed more easily through the network, avoiding the problems of vanishing gradients and network degradation that arise as the number of network layers increases.

Szegedy et al. proposed the GoogLeNet model [13],

535
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:56:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

introducing the Inception structure, which was the first of its kind. The use of traditional ResNet networks with too many training parameters can easily lead to overfitting. To overcome this problem, they used the Inception structure to extract image features, which can increase the network structure in the lateral direction to achieve multi-scale extraction of input image feature vectors, thus greatly reducing the number of parameters while increasing the number of network neurons. The conventional Inception module connects 1×1, 3×3, and 5×5 convolutional layers in parallel with pooling layers and connects the results to the output.The Inception module reduces the dimensionality of the image mainly through 1×1 convolutional kernels, thus

u Transmit Source

c LDPC Encoders

reducing the network parameters. Subsequently, in the Inception V2 model, in order to further reduce the parameters of the network, the Google team replaced the 5×5 convolutional kernel with two 3×3 convolutional kernels, which reduces the number of parameters of the model by using smaller convolutional kernels, and reduces the complexity of the model with no change in the sensory field of the convolutional kernels.

C. decoding framework
The block diagram of the LDPC compiled code modulation system incorporating IncentRestNet is shown in Figure 1.

BPSK Modulation

s

y Channel

Training Source LDPC Encoders
Output

source-dependent optim iza tion

IR Network Noise Predictor

BPSK Modulation

Channel

ū

ADMM

Decoder

c-

BPSK

Demodulation

Fig. 1. Overall decoding framework

Trained IR-Net

ñ- +

y-

z

Channel

Adjudicator

There are two sources in the block diagram, a transmission source, which is used to simulate the source that generates the messages to be sent, and a training source that is used to generate the training messages when training the network.
Before starting the transmission, the training source generates a sequence of messages for training, which is encoded by the LDPC encoder, the encoded signal is then passed through Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) to get the complex signal, the complex signal is then superimposed with Gaussian white noise to get the noisy signal, and the noisy signal is then fed into the IR Noise Predictor to get the predicted noise, and the noisy signal is subtracted from the predicted noise. The predicted noise is obtained, the predicted noise is subtracted from the signal with noise to obtain the first round of recovered information sequence, the original information generated by the training source and the recovered information sequence are used to optimize the parameters in the IR network predictor, and when the network optimization reaches the preset threshold, the transmission task is started.
At the transmitter side,Order u denotes the sequence of messages sent，After the LD PC encoder has obtained the encoded code word c，The code word c goes through BPSK to get the complex signal s，Afterwards the signal symbol s is transmitted through the Gaussian channel channel，obta y Compound signal plus noise signal.
At the receiver side, the noise added complex signal noise is input to the trained IR network noise prediction which outputs the predicted noise. Then the added noise complex signal is subtracted from the predicted noise to obtain the denoised signal. The sequence of hard verdict information

obtained by the receiver-side judger according to the maximum likelihood criterion z ， where the individual judgment symbols are:
z j = arg min y j − s , j = 1,2,...n
Among them.，  is the Euclidean paradigm.
Immediately after that the judgment symbols will be demapped, i.e., BPSK demodulation to get the demodulated signal c̅ and then pass c̅ to the ADMM decoder，get a vector u̅，The vector u̅ holds if and only if the following equation is true：
u̅ H T = 0
where H stands for the OSD matrix.
D. Inception-ResNet network design and data processing The original noise-complex signal is directly
superimposed to get similar to the pixel matrix in the image is obviously unreasonable, combined with the characteristics of the complex signal in the actual communication, the noise-complex signal will be input into the network output layer before the real-virtual separation of the operation, and then after the network output layer for the reconstruction of the operation. As shown in Figure 2
After separating the noisy complex signals according to the real part of the imaginary part, then the real part of the imaginary part of the data is placed vertically, and the resulting data matrix is input to the input layer of the IR predictor network.

536

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:56:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Separation of Image and Reality

Input layer

IR-NET
...

Input layer

Reconfigure Reality and Image

... ... ...
Inception 1
...
Inception 2
... ... ... ...
Inception 3

Figure 2. Separation of reality and reconstruction

The network structure of the IR predictor is shownin Fig.3.
IR predictor network input after the separation of real and imaginary sample data, the sample data first through three layers of convolutional kernel size 1 × 7 CNN network, and the number of channels from 1 to 128, and then through the three layers of improved Inception structure network, three layers of the network structure between the sequential residual structure links, and then through the three convolutional

kernel size 1 × 7 CNN network, the number of channels from 128 down to 32, and finally through the fully connected layer, the output data and the sample labeling data (i.e., the original noise) to calculate its mean square error, after reaching the output layer, the corresponding need to be false real separation of sample data. number decreases from 128 to 32, and finally through the fully connected layer, the output data and the sample labeling data (i.e., the

INPUT

1×7CNN

1×7CNN

1×7CNN

1×3CNN 1×3CNN 1×3CNN

1×3CNN 1×5CNN

1×7CNN

1×1CNN

Connect

1×3CNN 1×3CNN 1×3CNN

1×3CNN 1×5CNN

1×7CNN

1×1CNN

Connect

1×3CNN 1×3CNN 1×3CNN

1×3CNN 1×5CNN

1×7CNN

1×1CNN

Connect

1×7CNN

1×7CNN

1×7CNN

FC

OUTPUT

Figure 3. IceptionResNet Noise Reduction Module

original noise) are used to calculate its mean square error, and after reaching the output layer, the corresponding need for virtual reconstruction (i.e., integrating the predicted data into a complex form).
III. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSES
A. Experimental preparation
The decoding performance of the IR-ADMM algorithm, and the CNN-algorithm for different number of iterations is represented in Fig. 5, where it can be seen that the IR-ADMM decoding scheme for 5 and 10 iterations improves the decoding performance by 0.2 dB and 0.3 dB at a BER of . For simulation, an LDPC code of size C(65, 39) is constructed using the quasi-cyclic basis matrix construction method, where the row weight is 3 and the column weight is 5. The transmission scheme uses BPSK modulation and the noise correlation coefficient, ρ, is set to 0.8. The simulation environment utilizes the Windows 10 operating system,

Python 3.6, and pytorch as the computational framework, and an NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti GPU is also utilized for accelerated computation. NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti GPU was also utilized for accelerated computation. In the training phase, data generated at multiple signal-to-noise ratios [0 dB, 2 dB, 4 dB, 6 dB, 0.5 dB]] were used. For each signal-to-noise ratio 100000 symbols were generated, of which 80% were used for network training and the rest for testing. For initialization, the Xavier initialization method was used, the Adam optimization algorithm was chosen, the loss function used the mean square error (MSE), the learning rate was set to 0.01, and the decay rate was set to 0.99. The cutoff condition for training was set to the loss function not to decrease or to reach the maximum number of iterations of 3,000. To improve the robustness of the model for different signal-to-noise ratios, batch normalization was used and 100 samples were selected for training at each signal-to-noise ratio.
B. Example validation analysis

537
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:56:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. Decoding performance of traditional BP,ADMM,simple CNN networks
In Fig. 4, the decoding performance of the classical traditional decoding algorithms in LDPC, BP and ADMM, as well as the decoding performance using only a simple CNN, are compared. As can be seen from the figure, for the decoding performance of the CNN compared to BP and ADMM at BER of 1 dB and 0.5 dB, respectively, which confirms the feasibility of optimizing the CNN network.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The objective of this paper is to propose a scheme called ADMM-IR and its optimization method for LDPC code coded modulation system to reduce the impact of correlated channel noise on the system performance. Eliminating the prediction noise from the received signal by iterative operation can attenuate the effect of noise on the information, thus providing denoised data for detection and decoding and improving the signal-to-noise ratio of the received signal. Simulation results show that the optimized ADMM-IR algorithm can achieve a performance gain of nearly 1 dB in (65, 39) LDPC codes. Future research will consider ADMM-IR schemes for multivariate LDPC codes on higher domains and extend the channel to other channels such as fading noise channels and inter-code interference.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by General Project of Education Department of Liaoning Province in 2022 (NO. LJKMZ20220612), Shenyang Natural Science Foundation (NO. 22-315-6-10), in part the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO. 61971291)
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] J. Feldman, M. Wainwright, and D. Karger, “Using linear programmingto decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3,pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[3] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methodsfor large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12,pp. 7870–7886, Dec. 2013.
[4] NACHMANI E，BE’ERY Y，BURSHTEIN D．Learning to Decode Linear Codes Using Deep Learning［C］∥54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication，Control，and Computing．Monticello: IEEE，2016: 341 －346．
[5] Zhang G, Heusdens R, Kleijn W B.Large Scale LP Decoding with Low Complexity[J]. IEEE communications letters, 2013 ， 17(11): 2152-2155.

Fig. 5. Performance of IR-ADMM decoding scheme with different number of iterations
[6] Jiao X,Mu J, He Y C, et al. Efficient ADMM Decoding of LDPC Codes UsingLookup Tables[J].EEE Transactions on Communications, 2017,65(4): 1425-1437.
[7] Nachmani E, Be'ery Y, Burshtein D. Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning[J]. 54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), 2016, 2(3): 341-346.
[8] Xia Q,Lin Y，Tang S, et al. A Fast Approximate Check Polytope ProjectionAlgorithm for ADMM Decoding of LDPCCodes[J]. IEEE Communications Letters,2019，23(9): 1520-1523.
[9] Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia YQ, et al. Going deeper with convolutions. Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. Boston, MA, USA. 2015.1–9. [doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298594]
[10] GRUBER T ， CAMMERER S ， HOYDIS J ， et al ． On Deep Learning-based Channel Decoding［C］∥2017 51st Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems.Baltimore: IEEE，2017: 1－6．
[11] DUFFY K R，LI J，MEDARD M． Guessing Noise，Not Code-words ［C］∥2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory ( ISIT) ．Vail: IEEE，2018: 671－675．
[12] He KM, Zhang XY, Ren SQ, et al. Deep residual learning for image recognition. Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. Las Vegas, NV,USA, 2016. 770–778. [doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90]
[13] Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia YQ, et al. Going deeper with convolutions. Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. Boston, MA, USA. 2015.1–9. [doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298594]

538

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:56:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

