4284

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

High-Throughput and Hardware-Efficient ASIC-Chip Fabrication of Reconfigurable
LDPC/Polar Decoder for mMTC and URLLC 5G-NR Applications
Anuj Verma , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and Rahul Shrestha , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— This manuscript proposes hardware-efficient and high-throughput reconfigurable architecture of the channel decoder for unified decoding of LDPC or polar code. It has been designed based on the new dataflow technique for reconfigurable decoding that incurs lesser hardware resources in the decoder design. In addition, this work presents memory-organized architecture that exploits the shared-memory hardware and also excludes various conventional sub modules. Furthermore, this reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder has been ASIC fabricated in UMC 110 nm-CMOS technology node, occupying an area of 1.96 mm2. It supports multiple code-rates and code-lengths that are compliant to mMTC and URLLC applications of 5G-NR wireless communication standard. At the supply voltage of 1.2 V, the proposed decoder-chip operates at the measured clock frequency of 72.7 MHz and delivers a data throughput of 3.35 Gbps that is 4× higher than the state-of-the-art implementation. It also consumes 15.8% lesser area and achieves 2.5× better hardware-efficiency in comparison to the contemporary works.
Index Terms— Low-density parity check (LDPC) code, polar code, fifth-generation new radio (5G-NR) technology, digital architecture design, application-specific integrated circuits (ASIC).
I. INTRODUCTION
CONTEMPORARILY, third-generation partnership project (3GPP) radio access network (RAN) is targeting to elevate various parameters like energy efficiency, data throughput, spectral efficiency, traffic capacity, and user as well as control plane-efficiencies of the communication network. To achieve such milestones, fifth generation (5G) wireless-communication systems are adopting and enhancing these parameters to upgrade the existing communication-network architectures [1], [2]. The international telecommunication union (ITU) has incorporated and commercialized these 3GPP requirements for the 5G new-radio (5G-NR) standards [4]. Hence, ITU has diversified
Manuscript received 15 March 2024; revised 15 May 2024 and 21 June 2024; accepted 12 July 2024. Date of publication 23 July 2024; date of current version 29 August 2024. This work was supported by the Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Systems (ICPS) Programme, Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India. This article was recommended by Associate Editor L. Gan. (Corresponding author: Rahul Shrestha.)
The authors are with the School of Computing and Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Mandi 175005, India (e-mail: d17029@students.iitmandi.ac.in; rahul_shrestha@iitmandi.ac.in).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSI.2024.3429174.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2024.3429174

the high-end 5G use-cases into three major application areas: enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), ultra reliable low latency communications (URLLCs), and massive machine type communications (mMTCs) [1], [2], [4], [5]. Here, eMBB applications are primarily deployed for 5G-NR cellular communications that further improves capacity, datathroughput and connectivity-speed of fourth generation (4G) communication-standard [5]. Secondly, URLLC applications are conceived for the critical missions that require robust data-exchange with shorter data-packet transmissions to fulfill reliability and latency requirements of the 5G-NR standard. Furthermore, mMTC applications are widely used in internetof-things and drone data transmissions. In addition, both URLLC and mMTC applications are adopted by autonomous vehicles for their vehicular communications [5]. However, URLLC and mMTC are still in the deployment phase and they are several years away in most of the locations. In order to satisfy all the requirements of these 5G applications, forward-error correction (FEC) codes play a critical role in the design of physical layer that is compliant to 5G-NR standard [1]. To reinforce the technical specifications of URLLC and mMTC devices, there are several documents [6], [7], [8] that have been proposed for 5G-NR based URLLC and mMTC applications by various organizations. Tailbiting convolutional codes (TB-CC), turbo, LDPC and polar codes has been incorporated for URLLC and mMTC applications [7]. The reported work from [3] presented the performance analysis of various coding schemes for 5G-NR applications. Important requirements for URLLC and mMTC channel-coding schemes are to provide excellent error-performance with high reliability and extremely low error-floors. Moreover, an extreme no error-floor for a channel coding scheme is the significant factor to achieve ultra-reliability [7], [8]. Unfortunately, small block length of turbo code and TB-CC is sensitive to the burst error due to the existence of error floor on its coding performance [7]. No error-floor is observed for LDPC and polar codes at 10−5 FER [9]. Hence, our work incorporated LDPC and polar channel decoders for 5G-NR URLLC and mMTC applications.
For the 5G-NR wireless communication systems, LDPC code has been standardized as the FEC code due to its sparse nature and near Shannon-limit performance [10]. There are

1549-8328 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERMA AND SHRESTHA: HIGH-THROUGHPUT AND HARDWARE-EFFICIENT ASIC-CHIP FABRICATION

4285

various LDPC decoding-algorithms like sum-product (SP), min-sum (MS), offset MS (OMS), simplified OMS (SOMS), and normalized MS (NMS) [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. Conventionally, SP decoding algorithm delivers excellent coding performance at the cost of highly complex hardwareimplementation (i.e. consuming large design area) [11]. Similarly, MS, OMS, NMS and SOMS LDPC-decoding algorithms are designed as hardware-friendly algorithms that incur minor degradation in the coding performance [12], [13], [14], [15]. In addition, scheduling technique for LDPC decoding is classified as layered and flooding [16], [17]. The layered scheduling achieves better coding performance [16], and the flooding scheduling delivers lower latency and higher datathroughput, at the cost of larger area requirement [17]. On the other side, polar codes are linear block codes that can achieve the channel capacity for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels [18]. It is mainly adopted by 5G-NR standard for control signaling due to its lower computational complexity [2]. Belief propagation (BP), successive cancelation (SC), SC list (SCL), and SC-flip algorithms are primarily used for decoding such polar codes [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. Here, BP-based polar decoding algorithm is inherently suitable for parallel computation to achieve higher datathroughput [19]. On the other hand, SC decoding algorithm delivers excellent coding performance and consumes longer latency. The SCL decoding algorithm improves the coding performance at the price of higher hardware-requirement and energy-consumption [21]. Its performance is further enhanced with the formulation of SC-flip decoding algorithm based on an alternative technique that relies on the multiple decoding sequences to identify correct and incorrect codewords [22].
Our work is mainly focused towards URLLC and mMTC applications for 5G NR wireless communication standard. Ultra-reliability and low-latency are two major requirements for URLLC devices whereas low-cost, hardware-efficient, and low-power consumption are the key performance indicators (KPIs) for mMTC application [6], [7], [8]. To achieve lower decoding latency, we have incorporated belief propagation (BP)-based decoding algorithm for polar codes due to its high parallelism property and it also delivers adequate FER performance in the range of 10−3−10−8 at suitable SNR value that is compatible for smart grids, tactile internet, intelligent transportation systems [3], [6]. In addition, the log-likelihoodratios (LLRs) selection routing network for LDPC min-sum has high resemblance with polar BP-based decoding algorithm that leads to better resource sharing of computational units and memory organizations. Thus, it delivers alleviated hardware and energy consumptions to fulfill high-end specifications of 5G-NR mMTC applications [6]. In literature, there are various hardware implementations that are separately reported for LDPC and polar decoders where [15], [23], [24] are some of the recent works. However, based on the contemporary demand to incorporate dual channel-codes for evolving wireless-communication technologies like 5G-NR and 6G, it is high-time to proliferate the development of efficient and unified hardware-architectures for flexible channel decoder that supports such requirement. In this context, one of the major research challenges is to design hardware-efficient

decoder chip with unified architecture that meets high-end specifications of evolving technologies and flexibly support more than one channel decoding schemes. Presently, there is a surge in the implementation of reconfigurable channel decoder for both LDPC and polar codes that are adopted by 5G-NR standard. With this notion, Su et al. recently reported energyefficient dual-mode decoder for LDPC and polar codes based on BP technique for 5G-NR standard [25]. Similarly, Cao et al. developed pipelined architecture for reconfigurable channel decoder for LDPC/polar code that supports eMBB applications of 5G-NR standard [26]. Additional hardware-efficient architectures of reconfigurable LDPC/polar channel-decoders and their FPGA implementations are reported by Lin et al. [28] and Yang et al. [29]. On the other hand, our work exploited common operations between LDPC and polar decodings like min-sum approximation, memory sharing of intrinsic as well as extrinsic information, and message routing (data-flow), in order to propose a new hardware-efficient architecture of reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder that surpasses the state-ofthe-art results. Specifically, our contributions are highlighted as follows.
• A new technique for reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoding process has been proposed in this work.
• Based on the aforementioned technique, flexible and hardware-efficient architecture of reconfigurable channel decoder for LDPC and polar codes has been presented here. It supports multiple code-rates and code-lengths that are specified by mMTC and URLLC applications of 5G-NR standard.
• In addition, a new memory-shared architecture has been presented that improves the data-flow of information and excludes the requirement of various computation modules in the proposed channel-decoder hardware. Furthermore, this paper also proposes hardware architecture for the processing element with lesser area requirement that is used in the polar decoding process.
• Finally, the proposed unified LDPC/polar reconfigurable decoder has been fabricated in united microelectronics corporation (UMC) 110 nm-CMOS technology. This chip has been characterized and functionally validated using the real-world test setup. All the measured results of our ASIC chip have been analyzed and compared with these contemporary implementations from the literature.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. System Overview
In 5G-NR physical layer, various user equipments (UEs) communicate with the base stations (gNBs), as shown in Fig. 1 (a). All nearby UEs initially generate a scheduling request (SR) signal to access the uplink resources for data transmission through the physical random-access channel (PRACH). Once gNBs receive SR signal, decision for data transmission is made, based on the channel quality measurement (CQM) [1]. After decoding the channel information from uplink (UL) grant, UEs transmit the UL data according to specified parameters in uplink control information (UCI). On the other side, gNBs transmit the down-link (DL) data

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4286

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 1. (a) System-level overview of 5G-NR physical layer, and (b) High-level architecture of physical layer for 5G-NR wireless system.

information through the physical down-link shared channel (PDSCH) by using specified parameters of down-link control information (DCI), and beam-forming technique [1], as presented in Fig. 1 (a). Here, the communication among UEs and gNBs takes place based on periodically generated positive (ACK) and negative (NACK) UCI acknowledgement signals.
Overall system-level architecture of 5G-NR wirelesscommunication system has been schematically presented in Fig. 1 (b). To begin with, transmit bits are passed through the uplink shared channel (ULSCH) processing unit to generate a codeword (CW). Initially, this ULSCH adds cyclic redundancy check (CRC) and parity bits, by the code-block segmentation and the channel encoder units, respectively [2]. Such parity bits aid to mitigate distortion on the transmitted signals, across wireless channel, due to external noise, multi-path fading, and modulation interferences. Further, these encoded bits are processed by the rate matching unit for shortening and extending, in order to support specific code rates that are compliant to 5G-NR standard [2], as shown in Fig. 1 (b). This rate matching unit enhances channel bandwidth efficiency and flexibility of the communication system without increasing the complexity. Now, bit interleaver disperses the sequence of bit-stream for transmission to alleviate the burst error. Thereafter, the ULSCH-generated CW is transmitted to the physical uplink shared channel (PUSCH) processing unit where CW are scrambled to prevent the unauthorized access of data, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). It also shows that such scrambled CW are digitally modulated via QPSK/QAM scheme and generated symbols are mapped into 1 to 4 layers, which are processed by the transform pre-coding with lesser peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR). These modulated symbols are multi-antenna pre-coded to achieve beam-forming and spatial multiplexing

for the line-of-sight data transmission between UEs and gNBs [2]. Therefore, all these PUSCH generated symbols are non-interleaved/interleaved mapped with the physical resource blocks for the orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) modulation, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). Here, noninterleaved mapping is the direct mapping of symbols to the resource blocks. On the other side, interleaved mapping provides the frequency diversity by distributing the resource blocks over the entire bandwidth [1], [2]. Consecutively, all OFDM symbols are processed by the analog radio-frequency (RF) frontend and transmitted via massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) scheme over the PRACH, as presented in Fig. 1 (b).
At the receiver side, MIMO antennae captures noisy signals where a band-selection filter selects the specified frequency band that is compliant to 5G-NR standard [1]. Now, these filtered high-frequency signals are passed through the low noise amplifier (LNA) to suppress noise and restore the signal strength. Further, such continuous-time analog signals are digitized with the aid of analog-to-digital converter (ADC), whose output is OFDM-demodulated and passed to the physical down-link shared channel (PDSCH) processing unit, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Here, OFDM demodulated symbols are de-framed by the resource block de-mapper [2]. Subsequently, the multi-antennae decoder selects the radio-frame symbols with the aid of demodulation reference signals (DMRSs). Furthermore, such decoded symbols are mapped into 1 to 8 layers, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). After layer mapping, the channel estimation process provide improvement in the coding performance and enhances the spectral-efficiency as well as reliability of received OFDM symbols [2]. Thereafter, these symbols are soft-demodulated to generate the log-likelihood

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERMA AND SHRESTHA: HIGH-THROUGHPUT AND HARDWARE-EFFICIENT ASIC-CHIP FABRICATION

4287

‘0’ value [14]. After initialization, the message propagates between CNs and VNs iteratively to update the a-posteriori (AP) LLRs. Therefore, the VN messages (denoted as mvc) are updated as

m

t vc

=

Cx

−

m

(t −1) cv

(1)

corresponding to the BG-matrix layer at the tth iteration. Further, these updated VN messages are used to update CN messages (mcv), based on the mathematical expression shown below in (2)

mcv

=

s i gn (m v´ c )
v´εN (c)\v

×

m
v´εN

in |m
(c)\v

v´c

|.

(2)

Here N (c) is the set of VNs that is connected with cth CN whereas v´ ε N (c)\v denotes all VNs in N (c) excluding VN v. In addition, Av is the AP-LLRs (updated belief) for VNs that is computed as

Fig. 2. (a) Sparse parity-check-matrix H and base matrix B that generate LDPC code with an expansion factor z = 3, (b) basic representation of Tanner graph that is derived from H matrix, and (c) message-passing process carried out between CNs and VNs along various iterations.
ratios (LLRs), corresponding to all the transmitted bits. Furthermore, all these received LLRs are descrambled into 1 or 2 CW(s), and are processed by the inverse rate matcher. Here, initial 2×z bits (where z refers to expansion factor) are punctured and assigned with zero values to match the code-rate, corresponding to the transmitted 5G-NR code-rate. Such de-punctured LLRs are transferred to bit-quantized and such quantized LLRs are fed to the reconfigurable LDPC/polar channel decoder which processes these LLRs to generate the error-free decoded bits. Eventually, the CRC of decoded bits is carried out and if it is same as the transmitted CRC bits then these decoded bits are considered as true transmitted bits.
B. 5G-NR Error-Correction Codes
As discussed earlier, LDPC and polar codes are specified by 5G-NR standard for data processing and controlling channels, respectively [2]. Specifically, quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes are linear block codes based on the sparse parity-check-matrix H ∈ R(n−k)×n where k and n represent total number of information and codeword bits, respectively. Such H matrix comprises of standardized base-graph matrix B ∈ R(nb−kb)×nb . Its every element is replaced with permutation identity (Pz) or zero (Oz) matrix with the expansion factor of z, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (a). Note that LDPC codes can also be graphical represented using the Tanner graph, as shown in Fig. 2 (b). Here, check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs) are connected with the edge, corresponding to the bit value of ‘1’ in H matrix. These CNs and VNs iteratively process and propagate the quantized LLRs while decoding the QC-LDPC codes, as presented in Fig. 2 (c).
In the initialization process of LDPC decoding, all the channel-LLRs are stored in a-posteriori LLRs (denoted by Av) and CN messages (represented as mcv) are assigned to

Av = mvc + mcv.

(3)

Hence, the VN, CN and AP messages are updated in same

manner till last BG layer that is mark up as single decoding

iteration. Such iterative process of decoding terminates when

all the parity-check equations are matched or the maximum

number of iterations has been exhausted.

On the other hand, polar codes are (n, k) linear block codes

where n>k [18]. To begin with, k information bits are trans-

mitted over the reliable channel, referred as free bits, whereas

remaining n−k parity bits (i.e. frozen bits) are transmitted

over unreliable channel. Such distribution of bits over reliable

and unreliable channels is termed as channel polarization [18].

Furthermore, n codeword bits can be generated by matrix mul-

tiplication of k information bits with the generator matrix G.

Here, G is mth Kronecker power of F =

10 11

and m =

log2(n) that can be mathematically expressed as G = F ⊗m.

Polar codes can be graphically represented as a factor graph

which plays key role while decoding the polar codes, using the

BP-based decoding-algorithm. Generally, (n, k) polar codes

can be represented with m−stage factor graph that contains

(m+1)·n nodes. Furthermore, factor graph shown in Fig. 3 (a)

represents (n = 8, k = 4) polar code and it has three

stages with (3 + 1)·8 = 32 nodes. Here, each processing

element (PE) has been presented in Fig. 3 (b). Furthermore, the

BP decoding algorithm is associated with (i, j)−index node

where LLR messages are iteratively propagated from left-toright (Lit, j ) and right-to-left (Rit, j ) among their adjacent index node, corresponding to the tth iteration. The mathematical

expressions for Li, j and Ri, j messages are

Li, j = ϒ (Li+1,2 j−1, Li+1,2 j + Ri, j+n/2), (4)

Li, j+n/2 = ϒ (Ri, j , Li+1,2 j−1) + Li+1,2 j ,

(5)

Ri+1,2 j−1 = ϒ (Ri, j + Li+1,2 j , Ri, j+n/2),

(6)

Ri+1,2 j = ϒ (Ri, j , Li+1,2 j−1) + Ri, j+n/2;

(7)

where

ϒ(x, y) = sign(x) · sign(y) · min(|x|, |y|). (8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 3. (a) Factor graph with 32 nodes, representing (n = 8, k = 4) polar code, and (b) schematic representation of a processing element.

Fig. 4. Flow diagram of the conventional reconfigurable unified LDPC/polar decoding technique.

The adjacent nodes iteratively propagate LLR messages based on (4)−(7) and update LLRs on PEs. Therefore, such iterative process continues until all parity-check equations are matched or the maximum number of decoding iterations is reached.
The data-flow diagram of conventional reconfigurable technique for the decoding of LDPC and polar codes has been presented in Fig. 4. This decoding technique routes all the channel-LLRs through the multiplexers (MUXes) for the decoding of LDPC and polar codes. For the LDPC decoding, VN operations are performed on the received-LLRs from the LLR and reconfigurable memory. Similarly, the CN operations are achieved by three different sub-modules, as shown in Fig. 4. After the CN computations, all these updated CNs are combined and stored into the reconfigurable memory bank for next decoding iterations. Finally, the CN and VN updated LLRs are added to compute AP-LLRs (i.e. updated belief). Finally, the sign-bits of these updated beliefs are considered as the decoded-bits. For the polar decoding, the LLRs are passes through the MUXes to perform left-to-right (L) messages by polar left MS operation. Similarly, the rightto-left (R) message operations are achieved by polar right MS operation, as shown in Fig. 4. After the computations of L and R messages, these intermediate-LLRs are stored in reconfigurable memory for next decoding iterations. These intermediate-LLRs are iteratively propagated through the various polar stages (as presented in Fig. 3) until the maximum number of decoding iterations are exhausted.
III. PROPOSED RECONFIGURABLE CHANNEL-DECODER FOR LDPC/POLAR CODE
This section presents the proposed reconfigurable technique and hardware-efficient micro-architecture for decoding LDPC/polar code. It has been designed based on the 5G-NR specifications that are compliant to mMTC and URLLC applications [2]. In addition, it can flexibly decode both LDPC and polar codes with multiple code-rates as well as code-lengths of

the aforementioned 5G-NR applications. Furthermore, 5G-NR standardization of LDPC code is primarily based on two prototype base-graph (BG) matrices: BG1 and BG2 [2]. Our decoder circuitry has been designed to decode BG1 matrixbased (n =560, k = 352), (n = 512, k = 352), (n = 464, k = 352), and (n = 432, k = 352) LDPC codes at multiple code-rates of 2/3, 3/4, 5/6, and 8/9, respectively, with a fixed expansion factor of z = 16. The mathematical expression for the 5G-NR LDPC code-rate (R) is formulated as R = k/ (n − 2 · z). The first two columns of BG matrix are punctured due to their high-density at the transmitter side. Subsequently, these two punctured messages are recovered at the receiver side. Thus, 2·z bits are subtracted from codeword bits to achieve rate matching in 5G-NR LDPC codes. The suggested reconfigurable decoder also decodes (n = 128, k = 64) polar code with a code-rate of 1/2, which has been standardized by 5G-NR for controlling signal.
A. Reconfigurable Decoding Technique and Performance Analysis
Schematic flow of the proposed LDPC/polar unifieddecoding technique has been presented in Fig. 5. It illustrates LDPC, polar and reconfigurable decoding processes. Specifically, it depicts storage and processing units for LDPC as well as polar decoding that are mutually shared and accessed, depending on whether the input channel LLRs belong to LDPC or polar code. To begin with, these input channel-LLRs are first stored in the left memory, as shown in Fig. 5. Further, these LLRs are transferred to BG-selected layer or polar left-routing for LDPC or polar decoding, respectively. Simultaneously, right memory passes the intermediate LLRs to the subtraction unit for subtracting these LLRs with BG-selected LLRs for LDPC decoding based on (1), as discussed earlier. Subsequently, these subtracted values are permutation rotated by the cyclic rotation unit and are routed to processing unit for LDPC decoding. On the other hand, data from right

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERMA AND SHRESTHA: HIGH-THROUGHPUT AND HARDWARE-EFFICIENT ASIC-CHIP FABRICATION

4289

Fig. 6. Performance analysis (FER versus SNR plots) of the proposed reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoding algorithms under floating (denoted as FLP) and fixed point (denoted as FXP) scenarios for various code rates (denoted as CR), compliant to 5G-NR specifications.

Fig. 5. Flow diagram of the proposed reconfigurable technique for unified decoding of LDPC/polar codes.
memory and polar left-routing units are processed by the same processing unit for polar decoding, as shown in Fig. 5. This unit performs min-sum approximation for both LDPC and polar decoding based on (2)−(7). Following that, outputs from processing unit are routed to cyclic re-rotation or polar right-routing units for LDPC or polar decoding, respectively. Such cyclically rotated data are added and fed back to left memory via memory updating unit for LDPC decoding to update the left memory for next iteration, as illustrated by Fig. 5. It also shows that the right-rotated data are transferred back to both left and right memories for polar decoding, in order to update them for the next iteration. Hence, this data flow for reconfigurable decoding of LDPC or polar code is continuously processed until the maximum number of iterations is exhausted.
Based on the aforementioned decoding technique, frameerror-rate (FER) performance analysis of both LDPC and polar decoding algorithms has been carried out with 5G-NR specifications [2]. Here, we present Monte-Carlo simulations for the transmission of 108 bits into LDPC and polar frames with binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation scheme over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel environment. The LDPC frame size has been standardized (for 5G-NR technology) to 560, 512, 464, and 432 for the code-rates of 2/3, 3/4, 5/6, and 8/9, respectively, with an expansion factor of z = 16. Similarly, standard frame size for polar code is (1024, 512) with the code-rate of 1/2. As a result, multiple FER versus SNR plots are presented in Fig. 6 with high-reliability in the range of (10−3−10−8) FER. These plots are obtained for LDPC and polar decoding algorithms for 10 iterations, using floating and fixed-point quantization

schemes, as shown in Fig. 6. The quantization bits format for fixed point representations is denoted by (rq , sq ) where rq and sq represent integer and fraction bits, respectively. Here, we perform the FER performance analysis for (6, 0) APLLRs and (5, 0) CN messages for LDPC codes whereas the polar decoding message have (4, 0) fixed point quantizationbits format. It clearly shows that the FER versus SNR plots of floating-point scheme have higher coding gain than the fixed-point scheme which is adopted in the design of proposed reconfigurable decoder. On the other side, effect of decoding iterations on the FER performance has been depicted in Fig. 7. It is observed that the FER performance improves with decoding iterations over the higher value of SNR. Specifically, decoding of LDPC code with the code-rate of 3/4 provides the constant FER of 10−4.5 after 25 iterations at SNR of 3.2 dB, as shown in Fig. 7 (a). Furthermore, LDPC code-rate of 5/6 delivers the constant FER of 10−5.3 beyond 25 decoding iterations at the SNR of 4.5 dB, as illustrated in Fig. 7 (b). Finally, FER versus iteration plot for polar decoding (coderate of 1/2) shows a FER of 10−4.8 beyond 25 iterations at a SNR of 6 dB, as shown in Fig. 7 (c).
B. Proposed Hardware-Efficient Architecture of Reconfigurable Channel-Decoder
This subsection presents an overall hardware design of the proposed unified reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder architecture, as shown in Fig. 8. It has three key modules: memory & data routing (MDR) unit, processing element (PE) unit, and hard decision memory (HDM). To begin with, a collection of four quantized channel-LLRs has been received at the input side and are stored in the memories of MDR unit, as shown in Fig. 8. The MDR unit has been designed with the memories to store and route input channel-LLRs as well as intermediate-LLRs for both LDPC and polar decoding processes.
For LDPC decoding, such MDR unit processes the incoming channel-LLRs for the first iteration and it later processes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 7. FER versus iteration plots of the proposed (a & b) LDPC and (c) polar decoding algorithms.

Fig. 9. Proposed memory-efficient architecture of memory and data routing (MDR) unit for reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder.

Fig. 8. Overall hardware-efficient architecture of the proposed reconfigurable channel-decoder for decoding LDPC or polar code.
intermediate feedback (IntFB) LLRs for the remaining decoding iterations. Thus, it is fed with IntFB and a-posteriori (AP) LLRs from PE unit to generate variable-to-check node LLRs (i.e. denoted as VC) and normalized LLRs (i.e. NMs), as shown in Fig. 8. In addition, this MDR unit also facilitates data-routing with synchronization in order to fulfill the setup and hold timing requirements of our decoder microarchitecture. Following that, both VC and NM LLRs are applied to the PE unit through pipeline registers to alleviate critical-path delay of the proposed reconfigurable decoder, as presented in Fig. 8. It computes IntFB and AP-LLRs that are used for the next decoding iterations for LDPC decoding process.
For polar decoding, memories of the same MDR unit initially stores channel-LLRs and polar feedback (PFB) LLRs, as shown in Fig. 8. It also assigns maximum and zero values

for free and frozen bits, respectively, in memory locations. Further, this module routes left-to-right (L) and right-to-left (R) messages based on the stage processing in the ongoing decoding iteration and generates left routed (LR) and right memory (RM) LLRs. Additionally, the PE unit processes LR and RM LLRs for polar decoding to generate the PFB LLRs.
In the reconfigurable decoder architecture, the polar decoding modules remain in standby mode during the LDPC decoding process to conserve energy and vice-versa for the polar decoding process. In this work, such LDPC/polar decoding process continues for 10 decoding iterations to deliver the hard-decision (HD) decoded bits. Eventually, as the maximum number of decoding iterations is exhausted, the HDM unit is activated to store decoded bits that are obtained from MDR unit, corresponding to the transmitted LDPC/polar codes, as shown in Fig. 8.
1) Memory and Data Routing Unit: The proposed hardware architecture of MDR unit has been presented in Fig. 9. Here, four quantized channel-LLRs (each of 6 bit) are processed by the normalization unit to generate normalized-LLRs whose values range between -31 to 31. These LLRs are steered into the clocked de-multiplexer unit (CDU) that routes and buffers all the incoming normalized-LLRs until a full LDPC/polar frame is not received at the input side of CDU.
For LDPC decoding, all the a-posteriori LLRs (represented as AP0−AP303) from the PE unit and left memory bank (LMB) outputs are fed to memory writing network (MWN), as shown in Fig. 9. This MWN unit comprises of various multiplexers that updates all the LMB outputs with the updated AP-LLRs based on the current row processing of BG matrix and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERMA AND SHRESTHA: HIGH-THROUGHPUT AND HARDWARE-EFFICIENT ASIC-CHIP FABRICATION

4291

updated LLRs (MW1−MW35) that are concatenated (referred as LDPC feedback (LFB) LLRs) and fed to the left memory routing (LMR) unit. Therefore, all buffered-LLRs at the output side of CDU and LFB LLRs from MWN are simultaneously routed by the left memory routing (LMR) unit. This LMR passes channel-LLRs for first decoding iteration whereas it routes LFB LLRs for the remaining decoding iterations. Specifically, this LMR unit segregates these incoming LLRs into several groups of LLRs, as presented in Fig. 9. These segregated LLRs are stored in left memory bank (LMB) which is the combination of six 512-bit registers, and single memory with depth and data-width of 2 and 512 bit, respectively. Thus, LMB has cumulative depth of 8 and width of 512 bit. On the other side, intermediate feedback (IntFB) LLRs are routed by right memory routing (RMR) unit which segregates these data into two parts, as illustrated in Fig. 9. It also shows that such segregated LLRs are stored in right memory bank (RMB) that comprises of two memories: first memory has depth of 13 (corresponding to each row of BG matrix) with data-width of 800 bit, and second memory has depth of 4 with data-width of 720 bit. Unlike, entire RMB (including both first and second memories) is used for storing the intermediate LLRs for LDPC decoding. This method of memory organization eliminates the requirement of decompression units in conventional LDPC decoder [31] and thus leads to lesser memory consumption in the proposed unified LDPC/polar decoder-architecture. Similarly, LMB outputs are fed to LDPC selection network (LSN) that selects LLRs based on the BG-matrix layer scheduling. Hence, RMB and LSN outputs are segregated into LLRs and thereafter, applied to the sign-magnitude (SM) subtractors for subtraction (VN updation) and normalization of such LLRs. These SM subtractors also mitigate the overflow problem of our reconfigurable decoder-architecture. Subsequently, the normalized subtracted-output is applied to the cyclic rotational network that performs the cyclic rotation based on the BG matrix layer elements. Hence, VC1−VC304 and NM1−NM16 values from SM-subtractors and CR-unit, respectively, are fed to PE unit as outputs from MDR, as shown in Fig. 8 and 9 for LDPC decoding process.
In the polar decoding process, all buffered-LLRs at the output side of CDU and PFB LLRs from PE unit are routed by the LMR unit, as shown in Fig. 9. This LMR unit routes the CDU-LLRs for first decoding iteration, whereas PFB-LLRs are routed for the remaining decoding iterations. Further, the LMB stores these LMR LLRs into the memory locations corresponding to the polar stage processing. As discussed earlier, LMB has cumulative depth of 8 with width of 512 bit. Its organization depends on the m+1 stages of polar code and provides the provision of memory sharing between LDPC and polar decoding processes. In addition, such LMB has the storage of LDPC/polar channel-LLRs and left-to-right processed LLRs for polar codes. In the MDR architecture, LMB simultaneously provides all the LLRs within a single clock cycle to be processed by polar-stage (PS) and polarleft-routing (PLR) multiplexers, corresponding to the polar decoding stage. Here, the output of PLR multiplexer (i.e. LR) is transferred to PE unit for polar decoding, as shown in Fig. 9. On the other side, the RMR unit routes the max LLR, zero, and

PFB value for last, first, and intermediate stages, respectively. Further, these RMR-routed values are stored in RMB memory corresponding to the polar stage processing. Only first RMB memory is used to store right-to-left processing LLRs for polar decoding. Additionally, the outputs from the first memory of RMB are also transferred to PE unit for polar decoding process.
Hence, suggested LMB and RMB memory organizations also facilitate the sharing of storage requirements for channel as well as intermediately-processed LLRs for LDPC decoding and right-to-left cum left-to-right LLRs for polar decoding, respectively. Therefore, aforementioned storage sharing of LLRs and memory organization for LDPC and polar decoding has enhanced the memory efficiency of the proposed reconfigurable channel-decoder architecture.
2) Processing Element Unit: For the LDPC decoding, the proposed PE unit has been designed to compute (2), as shown in Fig. 10 (a). The normalized (NM) LLRs from MDR unit are fed to z number of LDPC min-sum (LMS) modules in the PE unit. Each of these LMS units is fed with 19 LLRs (concatenated into 95-bit bus where each LLR has a width of 5 bit). The NM LLRs are splitted into magnitude and sign values that are processed by magnitude-unit and sign-unit, respectively, as shown in Fig. 10 (b).
In the former module, magnitudes (i.e. 4 bits from each LLR) of all the LLRs are compared to generate two minimum values: min1 and min2, among all the 19 LLR magnitudes. Following that, equalizers and multiplexers are used for replacing the entire LLR magnitudes index with the minimum value, except the minimum value index that will be replaced by second minimum value. Simultaneously, the sign unit performs XOR operation of all sign bits (i.e. most significant bits (MSBs)) to generate a product bit. This product bit is XOR-ed with all sign-bits to update the signs of output LLRs, as presented in Fig. 10 (c). Eventually, these signs are concatenated with their corresponding updated-LLR magnitudes. This updating process is known as CN updation in LDPC decoding. Afterwards, these CN-updated LLRs are applied to the cyclic rotational unit. It rotates all these LLRs, corresponding to the BG matrix layer elements, and sends them to the sign magnitude (SM) adder that generates the AP-LLRs (i.e. belief updations). These updated AP-LLRs are fed back to MDR unit for the next decoding iteration.
For polar decoding, the proposed PE unit computes (4)−(7), as shown in Fig. 10 (a). The LR and RM LLRs generated from MDR unit are segregated into 256 LLRs (each LLR of 4 bit) and processed by 64 polar min-sum (PMS) modules, as illustrated in Fig. 10 (a). Every PSM module performs the min-sum operation for left-to-right (Li, j ) or right-to-left (Ri, j ) stages, depending on selection signal value of preceding multiplexer. Eventually, all the updated LLRs for polar decoding from the PMS modules are concatenated and applied to the polar right-routing unit for the data synchronization. Such polar synchronized data is then routed back to MDR unit for the next decoding iterations in the proposed reconfigurable decoder.
3) Scheduling of Proposed Decoder Architecture: For the LDPC decoding, an overall timing diagram for VN, CN,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 11. Timing diagrams for (a) LDPC and (b) polar decoding processes of the proposed reconfigurable channel-decoder architecture.

Fig. 10. Proposed hardware architectures of (a) processing element unit, (b) LDPC min-sum unit, and (c) polar min-sum unit for our LDPC/polar reconfigurable decoder.
and AP-LLR operations has been presented in Fig. 11 (a). Initially, the channel-LLRs are loaded in the memories of MDR by asserting high the L Mems signal. Thereafter, L Mems and RMems signals are asserted high to provide the LLRs that are corresponding to ongoing BG-matrix layer. Furthermore, VN, CN, and AP-LLRs operations are performed that correspond to specific BG-matrix layers, as shown in Fig. 11 (a). Such updating process follows the non-overlapping message scheme to deliver enhanced decoding performance. After the computations of AP-LLRs, they are written back to MDR memories by triggering low the L Mems signal, as illustrated in Fig. 11 (a). Hence, the aforementioned processing continues

till the last mb layer of BG matrix, and this marks the end of a single decoding iteration. Such processes are repeatedly carried out for 10 decoding iterations. After which, the HDM is activated for storing all the sign-bits of updated AP-LLRs in a single clock-cycle, referring Fig. 8. Finally, this HDM delivers 16 decoded bits in every clock cycle, as presented in Fig. 11 (a).
Similarly for polar decoding, another timing diagram is shown in Fig. 11 (b) where the channel LLRs are first stored into MDR memories by triggering high the L Mems signal. Following that, on applying the high values to L Mems and RMems signals, MDR memories send LLRs for the computation of right-to-left messages that are stage-wise propagated from mth to 1st stage, which marks the completion of right-message computations. Thereafter, the left-to-right messages are stage-wise propagated from 1st to (m + 1)th stage that indicates the completion of left-message computations, as illustrated in Fig. 11 (b). Thus, a combination of right-message and left-message computations are considered as the completion of a single decoding iteration for polar decoding. Our channel decoder repeats 10 such decoding iterations to decode the polar codes. Subsequently, HDM is activated and stores all the sign-bits of updated LLRs, and finally provides 16 decoding bits at the output in every clock cycle, as presented in Fig. 11 (b).
IV. MEASUREMENT RESULTS AND COMPARISONS
A. Chip Prototype and Packaging
In this work, an ASIC chip of the proposed reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder has been fabricated in UMC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERMA AND SHRESTHA: HIGH-THROUGHPUT AND HARDWARE-EFFICIENT ASIC-CHIP FABRICATION

4293

TABLE I
ASIC CHIP FEATURES OF THE PROPOSED RECONFIGURABLE LDPC/POLAR DECODER FOR 5G-NR STANDARD

TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION AND QUANTIFICATION OF DIGITAL I/O PADS OF OUR ASIC CHIP

This fabricated ASIC die has been quad flat no-lead (QFN) packaged with 56 digital input/output (I/O) pads, as shown in Fig. 12 (b). These pads are used for interfacing various I/O signals of our chip, as clearly illustrated in Table II. It also presents type and quantity of pads used for interfacing different I/O signals. This chip interfaces 39 input-signals including power supplies, and generates 16 decoded-bits with a done signal, as the final outputs of the reconfigurable decoding process. Finally, the proposed decoder chip has been mounted on the printed circuit board (PCB) with its 2.54 mm connectors, as shown in Fig. 12 (c), for testing and validation in real-world test scenarios.

Fig. 12. Fabricated ASIC chip of the proposed reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder in UMC 110 nm-CMOS technology node: (a) die-micrograph, (b) QFN packaged chip, and (c) ASIC-chip mounted on the PCB for characterization.
110 nm-CMOS technology node. This decoder architecture is designed using the standard Verilog hardware-descriptionlanguage (HDL) code which is functionally verified and gate-level synthesized, using the standard cell libraries of UMC 110 nm-CMOS process. Here, functional verification, synthesis, static timing analysis, and power estimation have been performed with the aid of standard EDA tools from Synopsys.
Furthermore, the physical design process is carried out with the Cadence EDA tools. The fabricated decoder chip is capable of decoding four code-rates for LDPC code and a single code-rate for polar code, based on the specifications of 5G-NR standard [2]. Die-micrograph of the fabricated ASIC-chip is shown in Fig. 12 (a). It occupies a die area of 3.69 mm2 and a core area of 1.96 mm2. This chip is capable of operating up to a maximum clock-frequency of 72.7 MHz. Detailed features of our fabricated decoder chip for 5G-NR specifications, are presented in Table I.

B. Test Setup and Functional Validation for the Characterization of Chip
Both schematic and real-world snapshots of the test setup for post-silicon validation of our fabricated decoder ASIC-chip have been presented in Fig. 13. Detailed operation and information flow are clearly depicted in the schematic snapshot. In MATLAB environment, the 5G-NR test cases are generated with k information-bits that are LDPC or polar encoded into n codeword-bits such that n>k. These n encoded bits are transmitted over the AWGN channel environment that introduces noise in the encoded bits which are received at the receiver side as noisy LLR samples, as shown in Fig. 13. Here, each of these noisy LLRs are fixed-point quantized into 6-bit value and are stored in the group of four LLRs (i.e. 24-bits) into the coefficient file (with an extension of .coe), which is interfaced with the FPGA-1 board. This file initializes the block random-access-memory (BRAM) of FPGA-1 (Xilinx Nexys FPGA-board), as shown in Fig. 13. From such BRAM, LLR groups (each of four LLRs) are fetched sequentially at the clock frequency of 72.7 MHz. It is an on-board clock signal that is generated with the help of FPGA clocking wizard intellectual property (IP) core. Furthermore, BRAM outputs and generated clock signal are configured to interact with PMOD connectors of FPGA-1 board, as presented in Fig. 13. Similarly, another FPGA-2 board has been configured with all the input controlling signals (like LDPC/polar switching, LDPC CR-selection and reset signals, referring Table II) for the decoder chip at 72.7 MHz of clock frequency to interact with PMOD connectors. Hence, FPGA-1 board delivers all the input LLRs and a clock signal of 72.7 MHz clock frequency to our decoder ASIC-chip. In addition, all input control signals

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

are fed to this chip by FPGA-2 board, as shown in Fig. 13. Finally, power supplies of 3.3 V and 1.2 V are provided to I/O pads and core of the chip, respectively.
Henceforth, the proposed reconfigurable decoder-chip processes all these input signals (from FPGA-1 and FPGA-2 boards) at an operating clock frequency of 72.7 MHz and generates error free decoded-bits, as outputs which are displayed on the screen of Keysight-16861A 32-channels logic-analyzer via connecting probe (Keysight N2140A probe), as shown in Fig. 13. Once these decoded-bits are obtained from our chip, they are validated with the simulated decoded-bits from the Matlab environment (i.e. displayed on the monitor of host computer). Such validation is carried out for all the standard code-rates of LDPC and polar codes, compliant to 5G-NR standard. Specifically, for the functional validation, quantized input LLRs (from the channel) are fed to the proposed decoder chip via BRAM of the FPGA-1 board, as discussed earlier. Simultaneously, the necessary control signals for reconfiguration are generated from FPGA-2 board and fed to decoder chip. At the clock frequency of 72.7 MHz, our decoder ASIC-chip processes such input LLRs for either LDPC or polar decoding, resulting into decoded-bits that are viewed on the logic analyzer screen. Such functionality of the fabricated ASIC-chip has been verified for more than 40 5G-NR standard based test cases with various SNR values at different code-rates for LDPC code, and also separately for the polar code. However, due to space constraint, this paper presents the decoded bits of only LDPC code with the code-rate of 3/4, as shown in Fig. 13 (c & d). Former Fig. 13 (c) shows the simulated decoded bits from the Matlab environment that is displayed on the monitor of the host computer, as depicted in the test-setup of Fig. 13 (a). Furthermore, the measured values of decoded bits from our decoder chip are displayed on the screen of 32-channel logic analyzer, as shown in Fig. 13 (d). Here, the proposed decoder is capable of delivering 16 decoded bits in every clock cycle. As shown in Fig. 13 (c & d), both simulated and measured values of decoded bits are matching, and hence this validates correct functionality of our decoder ASIC-chip. Similar validation process has been carried out for rest of the code-rates of LDPC and polar codes.
C. Post-Silicon Power Measurement and Throughput Estimation
In this work, power measurement is performed at the supply of 1.2 V while operating at 72.7 MHz of clock frequency. Both power and throughput measurements are carried out, based on the LDPC standard frame-sizes of 560, 512, 464, and 432 for 2/3, 3/4, 5/6, and 8/9 code-rates, respectively. For the polar code, these measurements are performed with the frame length of 128 and a code-rate of 1/2. Thus, various bar graphs that indicate the measured power consumptions of our decoder chip, while decoding under different channel-SNR values for LDPC (at 5G-NR code-rates) and polar codes are presented in Fig. 14. It also indicates that the total power consumed for decoding the LDPC code with 2/3 code-rate at a SNR of 1.6 dB can be reduced up to 2.31× with respect to code-rate of 8/9 at 7.1 dB. It shows that the power requirement

reduces, as the code-rate of LDPC code increases due to lower active-processing layers. Consequently, chip power consumption alleviates at the higher values of channel SNR which clearly indicates that the good environmental conditions result in lesser noisy decoded-bits. Note that the power consumption of higher code-rate is lesser than the lower code-rate due to the lower code-length of the LDPC codes. Similarly, the plots of power consumption versus operating clock frequency that depicts the surge in power requirement with increasing clock frequency have been presented in Fig. 15.
As demonstrated earlier, our decoder chip is capable of operating with a clock frequency of 72.7 MHz, at which it delivers a maximum throughput of T = 3.350 Gbps. Such throughput has been estimated as T = (λ×n×FClk)/(I×ξ ×L). Here, λ = 16 number of output decoded-bits are generated in every single clock-cycle, n is the code length, FClk indicates the clock frequency, I = 10 decoding iterations, ξ = 3 number of clock cycles to complete the computations of single layer, and L represents number of active layers that varies with respect to code-rates. Hence, L has the values of 13, 10, 7, and 5 for LDPC code-rates of 2/3, 3/4, 5/6, and 8/9, respectively, for 5G-NR standard [30]. Furthermore, Fig. 16 represents measured throughput of the proposed reconfigurable decoder-chip with respect to various clock frequencies for different coderates. These plots indicate that the throughput increases with higher code-rates due to the lower active layers (L). Hence, based on the aforementioned achievable throughput for polar code and at different code-rates of LDPC code, our decoder is suitable for the mMTC and URLLC applications for 5G-NR wireless communication standards.
D. Comparisons and Discussion
The measured results obtained from our fabricated reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder-chip (in UMC 110 nm-CMOS technology node) have been compared with the relevant stateof-the-art works, as presented in Table III. It lists both types of implementations from the literature: post-fabrication measured results (represented as ‘Silicon’ in Table III), and synthesized cum post-layout simulated outcomes (represented as ‘Synthesis’ in Table III). For fair comparison, all the technological parameters have been scaled with reference to 110 nm-CMOS technology node. Referring Table III, it can be observed that our reconfigurable decoder delivers 4× and 5.64× better throughput than the implementations of reconfigurable decoders, reported by Su et al. in [25] and Cao et al. in [26], respectively. In addition, the proposed decoder chip consumes 1.9× lesser latency than the reported work [23] and occupies 15.8% lower area than the smallest silicon area, reported by a contemporary work [26]. Furthermore, referring Table III, total power consumption of our decoder is 50.2% lower than the reconfigurable decoder of [25]. To justify the fair comparison, significant figure-of-merits like energy and hardware efficiencies are presented in Table III. Here, energy efficiency indicates the amount of energy required to decode a single bit. Hence, our decoder chip possesses better energy efficiency than all the reported implementations in Table III and it has specifically 10% higher energy efficiency than the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERMA AND SHRESTHA: HIGH-THROUGHPUT AND HARDWARE-EFFICIENT ASIC-CHIP FABRICATION

4295

Fig. 13. Snapshots of (a) real-world and (b) schematic-representation of the test setup for characterizing the fabricated ASIC chip of the proposed reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder. (c) Simulated decoded bits from the Matlab simulation, displayed on the monitor of the host computer, and (d) measured output decoded-bits (generated at 72.7 MHz of clock frequency) from the fabricated ASIC-chip of the proposed reconfigurable LDPC/polar decoder, displayed on the logic analyzer screen. Note: above outputs are obtained after decoding the LDPC code of the code-rate 3/4.
TABLE III COMPARISONS OF MEASURED RESULTS OF PROPOSED RECONFIGURABLE CHANNEL-DECODER WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART WORKS
state-of-the-art work [23]. Similarly, hardware efficiency is of the decoder per unit area. Referring Table III, it can be another FOM that represents the peak achievable throughput observed that the proposed decoder chip delivers competitive
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

Fig. 14. Analysis of the measured power consumptions of the proposed LDPC/polar decoder ASIC-chip at different channel SNRs, while decoding LDPC (at 5G-NR specified code-rates) and polar codes. Note: these are the total power requirements for our decoder-chip to achieve a FER of 10−4. As seen in Fig. 6, decoding of various LDPC/polar codes with multiple code-rates achieves such a FER at different range of SNRs.

Fig. 17. Comparative analysis of memory requirements versus code-lengths of the proposed and the reported (R1: [25], R2: [26], and R3: [24]) channel decoders.

Fig. 15. Analysis of the measured power consumptions of the proposed LDPC/polar decoder ASIC-chip at different operating clock frequencies.
Fig. 16. Variation of the achievable throughput of the proposed LDPC/polar decoder ASIC-chip at different operating clock frequencies.
hardware efficiency among all the reported works. Specifically, it has achieved 2.5× better hardware efficiency than the highest value of state-of-the-art work, reported by Yun et al. [15]. Based on aforementioned results and discussion, our reconfigurable decoder delivers better hardware as well as energy efficiencies, and it is also compliant to the specifications of 5G-NR wireless communication standard.
Fundamentally, total area occupied by the channel decoder is a function of code-length. Hardware requirements of computational unit and memory consumption (for storing LLRs)

of the decoder surge with the increasing value of code length. In the proposed reconfigurable decoder, the hardware resources of computational unit remains constant and it does not increase with the code-length, as explained earlier in Section III. However, its hardware requirement is a function of memory for storing the LLRs. Hence, the memory consumption of our decoder is mathematically formulated as

MP = n P 1 + 2 · qb(1 + log2 n P ) ,

(9)

ML = nL (1 + qb) + 2(qb + 10)(nL − kL ), (10)

MR = max(MP , ML ).

(11)

Here, MP and ML represent the memories needed for stand-alone polar and LDPC decoding processes, respectively. Nevertheless, suggested reconfigurable decoder consumes the memory (denoted by MR) that is maximum of these two memories (i.e. MP and ML ). Number of quantization bits has been denoted by qb. In addition, nL and n P represent the code-lengths of LDPC and polar codes, respectively. The memory requirements of reported works for various code-lengths are presented in Table III. It also shows that the proposed decoder consumes the least memory, supporting the code-length of 560. Nevertheless, based on (11), memory required by our design to support these reported code lengths have been computed and compared in Fig. 17. It is to be noted that the memory consumption of our decoder for the storage of LLRs is lowest among the reported architectures. Therefore, area consumption of the proposed decoder architecture remains comparatively lesser at these higher reported code-lengths, as listed in Table III. Hence, we can extend the suggested decoder-architecture to support any higher code lengths and it still consumes lesser area. Nevertheless, the fabricated decoder chip has been designed for supporting mMTC and URLLC applications of 5G-NR standard that requires a code-length of 560 [2].

V. CONCLUSION
In this work, various approaches related to information data-flow, storage requirement and area reduction have been

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERMA AND SHRESTHA: HIGH-THROUGHPUT AND HARDWARE-EFFICIENT ASIC-CHIP FABRICATION

4297

applied to design and fabricate reconfigurable channel-decoder for unified decoding of LDPC/polar codes. It has addressed the research challenge of delivering high-throughput and better hardware-efficiency for the contemporary wirelesscommunication technologies. Apart from the reconfigurable decoders that were reported in the literature, our decoder chip occupies lesser area than the stand-alone LDPC and polar decoders. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed ASIC chip is one the most hardware-efficient reconfigurable designs, reported till date in the literature. This work possesses profound importance in the efficient deployment of physical layers for current and future wireless communication systems.
REFERENCES
[1] Study on New Radio (NR) Access Technology, document ETSI TR 138 912, Ver 14.0.0, 3GPP Release 14 Tech. Specifications, May 2016.
[2] Multiplexing and Channel Coding, document ETSI TS 138 212, Version 15.2.2, 3GPP Release 15 Tech. Specifications, Jul. 2018.
[3] M. Shirvanimoghaddam et al., “Short block-length codes for ultrareliable low latency communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 130–137, Feb. 2019.
[4] IMT Vision Framework and Overall Objectives of the Future Development 1035 of IMT for 2020 and Beyond, Int. Telecom Union Radiocommunication (ITU-R), Geneva, Switzerland, Sep. 2015.
[5] 5G Wireless Access: An Overview, Ericsson, Stockholm, Sweden, Apr. 2020.
[6] Service Requirements for the 5G System; Stage 1 (Release 16), document TS 22.261, 3GPP Release 16, Mar. 2018.
[7] Channel Coding Scheme for URLLC, MMTC and Control Channels, document R1-167703, Intel Corp., 3GPP, 2016.
[8] Channel Coding Schemes for URLLC Scenario, document R1-1611692, 3GPP, Huawei, HiSilico, 2016.
[9] URLLC Channel Coding, document R1-1610142, 3GPP, Qualcomm, 2016.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, 1997.
[11] M. K. Roberts and R. Jayabalan, “An improved low-complexity sum-product decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” Frontiers Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 511–518, Jun. 2015.
[12] H. Li, J. Guo, C. Guo, and D. Wang, “A low-complexity min-sum decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Technol., Oct. 2017, pp. 102–105.
[13] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[14] A. Verma and R. Shrestha, “Low computational-complexity SOMSalgorithm and high-throughput decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 66–80, Jan. 2023.
[15] S. Yun, B. Y. Kong, and Y. Lee, “Area- and energy-efficient LDPC decoder using mixed-resolution check-node processing,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 999–1003, Mar. 2022.
[16] O. Boncalo and A. Amaricai, “Ultra high throughput unrolled layered architecture for QC-LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Annu. Symp. VLSI, Jul. 2017, pp. 225–230.
[17] O. Boncalo, A. Amaricai, and S. Nimara, “Memory-centric flooded LDPC decoder architecture using non-surjective finite alphabet iterative decoding,” in Proc. 21st Euromicro Conf. Digit. Syst. Design (DSD), Aug. 2018, pp. 104–109.
[18] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[19] R. Shrestha, P. Bansal, and S. Srinivasan, “High-throughput and highspeed polar-decoder VLSI-architecture for 5G new radio,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. VLSI Design 18th Int. Conf. Embedded Syst. (VLSID), Jan. 2019, pp. 329–334.
[20] M. H. Ardakani, M. Hanif, M. Ardakani, and C. Tellambura, “Fast successive-cancellation-based decoders of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 4562–4574, Jul. 2019.

[21] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhi, “Successive cancellation list polar decoder using log-likelihood ratios,” in Proc. 48th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Pacific Grove, CA, USA, Nov. 2014, pp. 548–552.
[22] F. Ercan, C. Condo, and W. J. Gross, “Improved bit-flipping algorithm for successive cancellation decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 61–72, Jan. 2019.
[23] Y. Tao, S.-G. Cho, and Z. Zhang, “A configurable successive-cancellation list polar decoder using split-tree architecture,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 612–623, Feb. 2021.
[24] S. Lee, S. Park, B. Jang, and I.-C. Park, “Multi-mode QC-LDPC decoding architecture with novel memory access scheduling for 5G newradio standard,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 2035–2048, May 2022.
[25] B.-S. Su, C.-H. Lee, and T.-D. Chiueh, “A 58.6/91.3 pJ/b dual-mode belief-propagation decoder for LDPC and polar codes in the 5G communications standard,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Lett., vol. 5, pp. 98–101, 2022.
[26] S. Cao, T. Lin, S. Zhang, S. Xu, and C. Zhang, “A reconfigurable and pipelined architecture for standard-compatible LDPC and polar decoding,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 5431–5444, Jun. 2021.
[27] A. Verma and R. Shrestha, “Hardware-efficient and high-throughput LLRC segregation based binary QC-LDPC decoding algorithm and architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 2835–2839, Aug. 2021.
[28] T. Lin, S. Cao, S. Zhang, S. Xu, and C. Zhang, “A reconfigurable decoder for standard-compatible LDPC codes and polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst. (APCCAS), Nov. 2019, pp. 73–76.
[29] N. Yang et al., “Reconfigurable decoder for LDPC and polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2018, pp. 1–5.
[30] A. Verma and R. Shrestha, “A new VLSI architecture of next-generation QC-LDPC decoder for 5G new-radio wireless-communication standard,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Oct. 2020, pp. 1–5.
[31] H. Cui, F. Ghaffari, K. Le, D. Declercq, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Design of high-performance and area-efficient decoder for 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 879–891, Feb. 2021.
Anuj Verma (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication from the Inderprastha Engineering College, Ghaziabad, India, in 2013, and the M.Tech. degree in VLSI from the Deenbandhu Chhotu Ram University of Science and Technology, Sonipat, India, in 2017. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Computing and Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Mandi. His current research interests include developing channel decoding algorithms and VLSI architectures for contemporary wireless communication standards.
Rahul Shrestha (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Bachelor of Engineering degree in telecommunication engineering from the B. M. S. College of Engineering, Bengaluru, India, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree in electronics and electrical engineering from Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati in 2014. From 2014 to 2016, he worked as an Assistant Professor with the Center for VLSI and Embedded System Technologies, International Institute of Information Technology Hyderabad, India. In 2018, he was a Visiting Assistant Professor with the Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden, under European Erasmus+ International Credit Mobility Program. Currently, he holds the position of an Associate Professor with the School of Computing and Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Mandi. His primary research interests include designing efficient algorithms and digital VLSI architectures and its transformation into ASIC-chip or FPGA-prototype for the real-world applications of signal processing, wireless communication, deep neural networks, forward-error-correction channel decoders, cognitive radio, and cooperative spectrum sensing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:58:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

