2024 3rd International Conference on Electronics and Information Technology (EIT) | 979-8-3503-6915-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/EIT63098.2024.10762738

2024 3rd International Conference on Electronics and Information Technology (EIT)

A CNN-Aided Post-Processing Scheme for Channel Decoding Under Correlated Noise

Junhao Liu1,2,*, Shaoli Kang2 , Jing Cheng2 , Jiaqing Wang2 , Ruihua Huang1,2 1China Academy of Telecommunications Technology (CATT), Beijing 100083, China
2CICT Mobile Communication Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing 100083, China Email: {liujunhao, kangshaoli, chengjing, wangjiaqing, huangruihua}@cictmobile.com

Abstract—In this paper, a convolutional neural network-aided post-processing scheme (CNNAPS) is proposed for improving the channel decoding performance of the denoiser under correlated noise. In this scheme, the CNN estimates actual channel noise for computing the error pattern, and then error nodes are identified by a threshold discrimination method. Specifically, the channel log-likelihood ratio (LLR) value of the identified error node is set to zero, while the received signal of the identified correct node is denoised. Furthermore, one of the key dvantages of CNNAPS is that it does not require knowledge of code structure properties, making it applicable to all linear block codes. Simulation results demonstrate that CNNAPS effectively identifies error nodes within error blocks. It is also shown that by implementing the post-processing along with a single redecoding, CNNAPS can significantly improve the error correction performance of the denoiser with minimal increase in complexity.
Keywords-Post-processing; convolutional neural network; error nodes identification; channel decoding; correlated noise.
I. INTRODUCTION
Channel decoding is a crucial technology for mitigating noise interference and ensuring the reliable transmission of information. In recent decades, there have been significant advances in both the theoretical and practical aspects of channel decoding. For example, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes showcase the potential to approach the Shannon capacity when decoded using the belief propagation (BP) algorithm [1]. The offset min-sum (OMS) and the normalized min-sum (NMS) [2], as alternative algorithms of BP for reducing complexity, are widely used in practice due to their hardware friendliness. However, in practical communication systems, the imperfect signal processing and device noise might make the channel noise exhibit correlation, which will degrade the transmission performance [3].
In order to reduce the correlated noise interference, improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and obtain better error correction performance, researchers have conducted a lot of works on denoising algorithms. In [4], a low-complexity denoiser based on convolutional neural network (CNN) was proposed, which can effectively estimate correlated noise samples and denoise the received symbols of error blocks for redecoding. Following this research work, authors in [5]-[7] employed the denoising method in Rayleigh fading channels with different correlation coefficients, resulting in satisfactory performance gains. Nevertheless, the aforementioned study focused exclusively on enhancing the overall reliability of nodes within error blocks by denoising, neglecting the specific treatment of error nodes that are more susceptible to noise

interference and decoding failures. Utilizing post-processing [8] techniques as a supplement to denoiser can mitigate the negative impact of error nodes during redecoding.
The fundamental principle of the post-processing technique is to identify and process the unreliable/error nodes of the decoded codeword and then to re-decode the received signal. In [9], the node with the minimum absolute value of the estimated log-likelihood ratio (LLR) after successive cancellation decoding was identified as the most unreliable node and then was flipped for redecoding. Furthermore, a deep learningassisted post-processing procedure using a binary classification network to identify unreliable nodes was presented in [10]. These methods can correct some error codes, but necessitates multiple rounds of redecoding, which is highly complex. A technique utilizing the simulated annealing algorithm to identify and process error nodes within elementary trapping sets was proposed in [11]. Another approach, which employed a neural network to learn specific trapping set structures and then re-decoded the error-side information, was studied in [12]. These methods can lower the error floor, but the need to reidentify and re-learn trapping sets when encountering new code limits their practical use.
It can be observed that the current post-processing techniques, which rely on multi-round redecoding or code structure properties, present challenges when applied to denoisers. Therefore, it is essential to optimize post-processing techniques to improve the channel decoding performance of denoiser without substantial complexity increase. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this specific approach has not been explored in the existing literature.
In this paper, we propose a CNN-aided post-processing scheme (CNNAPS) to complete denoising and error node processing simultaneously, which is suitable for all linear block codes. To be specific, the CNN is used to estimate the actual channel noise for calculating the error pattern, and then error nodes are identified by a threshold discrimination method. We utilize widely used LDPC codes to evaluate the effectiveness of CNNAPS. In particular, the channel LLR value of the identified error node is set to zero and the received signal of the identified correct node is denoised, which promotes successful error correction. The experimental results demonstrate that CNNAPS is able to effectively distinguish error nodes from correct nodes within error blocks. It is also shown that the proposed post-processing procedure can improve the error correction performance of the denoiser with a negligible increase in complexity.

979-8-3503-6915-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

150

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:01:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. The system framework of the proposed CNNAPS.

II. THE PROPOSED CNNAPS SCHEME
A. System Framework
The system model is illustrated in Fig. 1. The randomly generated information sequence of K bits,
x < ∋ x1, x2 ,≈, xK ( ⊆ζ0,1|K , is encoded through a linear
encoder to produce a codeword of N bits,
u < ∋u1, u2 ,≈, uN ( ⊆ζ0,1|N . The focus of this paper is on
the LDPC code, but the proposed scheme can be readily applied to other linear block codes.
By employing binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation, the BPSK symbol s < ,2u ∗ 1 is then transmitted across the Gaussian additive correlated noise channel. The received signal y can be written as

y < s ∗ n,

∋0(

where n of length N is the channel noise vector. n can be
generated by

n < R1/2nt ,

∋1(

where nt is a vector of standard Gaussian random variables
with mean 0 and noise variance ρ 2 , and R is the correlation matrix. According to the literature [13], R can be given by

Ri,j

<



θ (θ j

j,i , i ,i )), i

; ″

j, j,

(i, j

< 1,2,...,N )

∋2(

where Ri, j is the (i, j) th element of the correlation matrix R and θ is the correlation coefficient with θ ′ 1 .
Subsequently, a normalized min-sum (NMS) decoder is
utilized to derive the estimated codeword u# and estimated information sequence x# . The input of the NMS is channel LLR,
which is defined as

LLRi0

<

ln

P(ui P(ui

< 0| < 1|

yi ) , yi )

∋3(

where ui , yi denote the i th node of codeword and the corresponding received signal, respectively, and the superscript of LLRi0 indicates the initialization of NMS.
We use H to denote the parity-check matrix of LDPC. If
T
u# satisfies the check equation Hu# < 0 , it is determined that
there are no error nodes, and then x# is output. However, if
T
Hu# ÷ 0 , u# includes error nodes and they are identified in the
subsequent process.

At the receiver, the estimated transmit symbol #s and actual error pattern e can be calculated as

#s < ,2u# ∗1,

∋4(

and

ei

<| si

,

s#i

|<

2,   0,

error node, correct node,

∋5(

respectively, where ei is the value of the actual error pattern for the i th node. We can re-write s# as

#s < s , e, ei < 2 or 0.

∋6(

We obtain estimated noise n# as

n# < y , s# < n ∗ e.

∋7(

Actual error pattern e is correspondingly rewritten as

e < n# , n.

∋8(

151
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:01:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In light of the successful application of CNNs in estimating correlated noise [4]-[7], we propose to utilize the CNN to estimate the actual channel noise after NMS. Section II-B will present the details of the proposed CNN and its associated
training method. The estimated noise, n# , serves as the input to
the CNN to generate an approximate noise, n∃ , which closely approximates the actual channel noise, n . We defines the
residual noise as

r < n , n∃.

∋0/(

Therefore, we can calculate the estimated error pattern as

e# < n# , n∃ < e ∗ r.

∋00(

It can be readily obtained that the residual noise r
influences the value of the estimated error pattern e# and the
subsequent identification results of error nodes. Furthermore, SNR determines the interference level of noise on the signal, with lower SNR correlating to a higher decoding error probability. Varying SNR levels yield different error node positions and error probability distributions, making it challenging to derive the distribution of e . Consequently,
computing the probability distribution of e# is nearly
impossible.
To weaken the impact of r and improve the accuracy of
error nodes identification, a threshold discrimination approach is proposed in this paper to distinguish between error and correct nodes within an error block. In the approach, a node
with e# = T is considered as an error node, otherwise we i
regard it as a correct node. This method is formulated as



e# i

= T , error node,



∋01(



e# i

′ T , correct node,

where T is defined as the threshold. Subsequent experiments will confirm the effectiveness of this approach.
The processing of error nodes differs in the type of code and the soft/hard information used during decoding. For LDPC code with soft decoding, the processing of identified error nodes is concentrated on the channel LLR. The channel LLR reliability of the identified error nodes is relatively low since they are more susceptible to noise and more likely to fail in the decoding process. To mitigate the negative impacts of error nodes, traditional post-processing methods conducted flipping [8] or attenuation [14] on their channel LLR values.
In this paper, inspired by the puncturing operation of 5G New Radio LDPC codes [15], we apply zeroing the channel LLR values of error nodes, which is equivalent to puncturing the unreliable nodes at the receiver, and utilize the mutual information from other highly reliable nodes for successful error correction during the redecoding. In addition, for the identified correct nodes, we adopt denoising processing to

TABLE I.

THE PARAMETERS OF CNN

The number of convolutional layers Filter sizes
Numbers of feature maps Initialization method Loss function Optimizer method Learning rate
Channel SNRs for data set The number of epoch

4 {10,4,4,16} {64,32,16,1}
Xavier MSE Adam 0.001 [0:0.5:3] dB 30000

improve their reliability, which is the same as in [4]. The channel LLR processing is formulated as

 0 , e# = T ,



i

LLRϒ i

<  P(u < 0 | y , n∃ )

ln i

i

i,



P(u < 1 | y , n∃ )

i

i

i

e# i

′ T,

∋02(

where LLRϒ denotes the processed channel LLR value for the i
i th node. The processed channel LLR is then employed as input to the NMS for redecoding. In particular, the redecoding process is conducted only once.
B. CNN for Noise Estimation
In the proposed CNNAPS, CNN is utilized for noise
estimation in which one-dimensional vectors n# and n of the
same length serve as the feature and label, respectively, without the need for dimension reduction and classification. Accordingly, only convolutional layers are used for data feature extraction, which is similar to the approach described in [4]. The mean squared error (MSE) loss function is applied to minimize the error vector of CNN noise estimation, namely

2
n∃ , n

loss (n∃, n) <

,

∋03(

MSE

N

where N is the length of a codeword.
In order to enhance the robustness of the model, training data is generated within a range of channel SNRs and the number of data samples at each SNR is the same. The early stopping mechanism is applied to prevent the model from overfitting. As a result, training is terminated when the loss function no longer declines within a specified number of epochs.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we present experimental results that demonstrate the effectiveness of CNNAPS. Firstly, we compare the block error rate (BLER) performance of CNNAPS

152
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:01:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2. The BLER performance of CNNAPS for (576,432) LDPC code

(a)

under different error node processing methods.

Figure 3. The BLER performance of CNNAPS for (576,432) LDPC code at different threshold settings.
with various error node processing methods and threshold settings. Secondly, we utilize the denoiser in [4] as a benchmark for showcasing the performance improvement brought about by CNNAPS. Finally, the complexity of the proposed CNNAPS and the benchmark scheme is compared and analysed.
The experimental LDPC codes considered in this paper are the (576, 432) WiMAX LDPC code [16] and the (1998, 1512) quasi-cyclic LDPC code [17]. These codes represent short and long linear block codes, respectively. The simulation environment consists of an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU and an Intel Xeon Platinum 8255C 12-Core Professor CPU. The experimental platform is constructed using TensorFlow.
The hyper-parameters of CNN are shown in Table I. The CNN comprises four convolutional layers, with filter sizes of
ζ10,4,4,16| and feature map numbers of ζ64,32,16,1| . Xavier
method is used to initialize network weights, activation function is the rectified linear unit (RELU), Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001 is chosen, and the MSE is the loss function. The channel SNR value range is [0,0.5,1,1.5,2,2.5,3]

(b)
Figure 4. The BLER performance of denoiser [4] and CNNAPS. (a) (576,432) LDPC code. (b) (1998,1512) LDPC code.
dB, with 5140800 samples in the training set and 210000 samples in the test set. The training mini-batch size is 2800 and the number of epoch is 30000. Training is terminated if the value of loss function does not decrease for 500 consecutive epochs.
In order to reduce the decoding complexity, we use NMS with a normalization factor of 0.75 and 10 iterations for decoding. In the event that the NMS decoding is unsuccessful, the proposed CNNAPS procedure will be performed. Unless
otherwise specified, the correlation coefficient θ is 0.65 and the empirical value of the threshold T used to distinguish error
nodes from correct nodes within error blocks is 1.
Fig. 2 shows the BLER performance under different error
node processing methods. α < ζ0.3, ,1, 0| denotes that the
channel LLR values of error nodes are attenuated by 0.3 times, flipped and zeroed, respectively. When the BLER is 1≥10,1 ,
the post-processing decoding under α < ζ0.3, ,1, 0| exhibits
approximately 0.9 dB, 1 dB and 1.3 dB performance gains over NMS. Obviously, the performance gain of zeroing is

153
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:01:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

significantly better than that of attenuation and flipping, which proves the effectiveness of CNNAPS.

Fig. 3 presents the BLER performance under different settings of threshold values in error nodes identification. In the ideal case, all error nodes are identified. This is represented by the line labeled 'Ideally' and denoted as the optimal threshold discrimination situation. To test the influence of SNR on the threshold selection, we conduct simulations under a range of
thresholds, T < ζ2 , ρ , 2 , 2ρ , 2 , 3ρ ,1 ∗ ρ ,1,1 , ρ , 3ρ , 2ρ | .

The

BLER

performance

curve

at

T < ζ2 , ρ , 2 , 2ρ ,1 ∗ ρ ,1, 2ρ | is found to coincide with the

line labeled 'Ideally'. This indicates that the threshold is robust to error node identification under different SNRs and can effectively distinguish error nodes from correct nodes within error blocks.

Fig. 4a and 4b shows the BLER performance of denoiser [4] and CNNAPS for (576, 432) and (1998, 1512) LDPC codes, respectively. In particular, the denoiser is employed as the
benchmark scheme. At BLER of 1≥10,1 , CNNAPS exhibits 0.7 dB and 1.5 dB gain in LDPC codes (576, 432) and LDPC codes (1998, 1512), respectively, in comparison to the benchmark. Specifically, the (1998, 1512) LDPC code displays
an error floor at BLER of 2 ≥10,2 in the benchmark, whereas
CNNAPS exhibits no visible error floor at BLER of 1≥10,5 . It is shown that the CNNAPS can markedly enhance the error correction capacity of the denoiser, without the knowledge of trapping sets or multiple rounds of redecoding.

A computational complexity analysis shows that CNNAPS introduces only one subtraction, one comparison and one zeroing operation compared to the denoiser [4]. Furthermore, we find that the program runtime of CNNAPS is approximately equivalent to that of the denoiser. These evidences illustrate that the additional complexity of CNNAPS is considered negligible.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a CNN-aided post-processing scheme applicable to all linear block codes, which can improve channel decoding performance of the denoiser with negligible increase in complexity. In this scheme, we leveraged a CNN for actual channel noise estimation. Based on the estimated noise, we can further obtain error patterns. A threshold discrimination approach was designed to accurately distinguish between error nodes and correct nodes within error blocks. We utilized the widely used LDPC code as an example to evaluate the performance of the proposed CNNAPS. Specifically, we zeroed the channel LLRs of the identified error nodes and denoised the received signals of the identified correct nodes. The experimental results have confirmed the ability of CNNAPS to identify and correct error nodes within error blocks, resulting in notable performance improvement compared to the denoiser. In our future work, we will explore the use of other neural network architectures for noise estimation, including recurrent neural networks and residual networks.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is funded by National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022YFB2902605).
REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Decoding low-density parity check codes with normalized APP-based algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 1026–1030.
[3] S. S. Tehrani, B. F. Cockburn, and S. Bates, “On the effects of colored noise on the performance of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Process. Syst. Design Implement., Oct. 2006, pp. 226–231.
[4] F. Liang, C. Shen, and F. Wu, “An iterative BP-CNN architecture for channel decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics. Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 144–159, Feb. 2018.
[5] J. Li, X. Zhao, J. Fan, F. Shu, S. Jin, and Y. Qian, “A double-CNN BP decoder on fast fading channels using correlation information,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun. China, Oct. 2019, pp. 53–58.
[6] S. Li, S. Zheng, J. Zhang, X. Chen, and Z. Fei, “Modified iterative BPCNN decoder under correlated noise with symmetric α-stable distributions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Signal Inf. Data Process., Dec. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[7] X. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Feng, and Z. Wu, “A residual CNN-based denoiser for reliable recovery of bit stream with applications to soft channel decoding,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1677– 1688, Dec. 2022.
[8] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov./Dec. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[9] O. Afisiadis, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, and A. Burg, “A lowcomplexity improved successive cancellation decoder for polar codes,” in Proc. 48th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Nov. 2014, pp. 2116–2120.
[10] J. He, “A deep learning-aided post-processing scheme to lower the error floor of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Technol., Dec. 2020, pp. 1587–1592.
[11] Y. Tao, S. Sun, and Z. Zhang, “Efficient post-processors for improving error-correcting performance of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 66, no. 10, pp. 4032–4043, May. 2019.
[12] S. Han, J. Oh, K. Oh, and J. Ha, “Deep-learning for breaking the trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 2909–2923, May. 2022.
[13] S. K. Sharma, S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “SNR estimation for multi-dimensional cognitive receiver under correlated channel/noise,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 6392–6405, Dec. 2013.
[14] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error floor avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Sep. 2005, pp. 2386–2390.
[15] 3GPP, “3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding (Release 18), TS 38.212 V18. 2.0,” Mar. 2024.
[16] M. Helmling and S. Scholl, “Database of channel codes and ml simulation results,” Wimax 3/4A, University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.unikl.de/channel-codes
[17] “UCLA CSL Published Codes and Design Tools,” Online, http://www.seas.ucla.edu/csl/#/publications/published-codes-and-designtools

154
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:01:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

