2018

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Sneak Path-Aware Reliability-Based Iterative Majority-Logic Decoding Algorithms for LDPC Codes in ReRAM Systems
Lingjun Kong , Member, IEEE, Yingnan Qi , Haiyang Liu , Member, IEEE, and Chao Meng

Abstract— The performance of classical channel decoding algorithms in resistive random access memory (ReRAM) channels is severely degraded due to the sneak path interference (SPI) caused by the crossbar array structure. In this letter, we first propose a sneak path-aware reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding (SPR-IMLGD) algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes by integrating the sneak path information into reliability metrics. In particular, we introduce the sneak path distance, derived from the associated sneak path probability, which provides a desirable characterization of the presence and extent of sneak paths within a given memory cell. Moreover, we present an enhanced version of the SPR-IMLGD algorithm (ESPR-IMLGD) that further improves the error correction performance. We also optimize the calculation of sneak path distance, ensuring that the SPR-IMLGD and ESPR-IMLGD algorithms have the same level of computational complexity. Simulation results demonstrate that the SPR-IMLGD and ESPR-IMLGD algorithms can achieve better performance with lower computational cost compared with the existing methods.
Index Terms— Resistive random access memory, sneak path interference, sneak path distance, low-density parity-check codes, iterative majority-logic decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
RESISTIVE random access memory (ReRAM) has received considerable attention due to its potential for high-density, low-power non-volatile storage applications,
especially in emerging computing systems [1]. This potential stems from its unique crossbar architectures, which enable high memory density and facilitate straightforward fabrication processes. However, the inherent sneak path interference (SPI) in crossbar architectures poses a significant challenge, as it generates unintended current paths that degrade the perfor-
mance and reliability of ReRAM systems [2], [3]. In order to address the problem, some detection and mit-
igation techniques have been applied [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]. In [4], a probabilistic channel model for sneak paths has been
Received 20 May 2025; revised 23 June 2025; accepted 24 June 2025. Date of publication 30 June 2025; date of current version 12 September 2025. This work was supported by the Key Project of Basic Science (Natural Science) Research in Higher Education Institutions of Jiangsu Province (grant No. 22KJA510009), the Opening Project of Key Laboratory of Fabrication Technologies for Integrated Circuits, Chinese Academy of Sciences, JITSF (grant No. jit-b-202110), and the Open Research Fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University (No.2020D18). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Battaglioni. (Corresponding author: Haiyang Liu.)
Lingjun Kong and Chao Meng are with the Faculty of Network and Telecommunication Engineering, Jinling Institute of Technology, Nanjing 211169, China (e-mail: kong@jit.edu.cn; mengchao@jit.edu.cn).
Yingnan Qi is with the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China, and also with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: qiyingnan24@ ime.ac.cn).
Haiyang Liu is with the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail: liuhaiyang@ime.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2025.3584075

established under the assumption that unit selectors fail with a certain probability. Several channel detection schemes have been proposed based on this channel model. For instance, a detection scheme with adaptive threshold has been introduced in [5], where the detection threshold is dynamically adjusted using auxiliary information provided by certain pilot cells to determine the presence of sneak paths. With the rapid development in artificial intelligence, deep-learningbased techniques have also been applied in the detection of sneak paths. A deep neural network architecture has been introduced for signal detection caused by the SPI in ReRAM systems, which can achieve promising results in mitigating the interference [6]. In [7], a deep-learning-assisted threshold detection algorithm has been introduced, where detectors are trained offline for arrays affected by sneak paths and then applied for online data detection. In general, these approaches can outperform traditional methods at the expense of substantially increased computational complexity.
In addition to channel detection, channel coding also provides a means to cope with the SPI. Recent researches have demonstrated that employing modern coding techniques such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and polar codes can significantly enhance the error correction capability of ReRAM systems [9], [10]. In particular, it has been shown that LDPC codes have great potential in addressing the specific challenges posed by ReRAM channels. However, the highly dynamic nature of SPI often leads to suboptimal decoding performance in practice. Moreover, the high computational complexity of conventional belief-propagation (BP)-based LDPC decoding algorithms imposes significant limitations on their applicability in ReRAM systems, especially in resourceconstrained environments. In order to address the problem, the works [11], [12] have studied low-complexity bit-flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes in ReRAM systems.
The reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding (IMLGD) algorithms for LDPC codes have attracted considerable attention in recent years, owing to their potential for providing low-complexity error correction [13]. Traditional majority-logic decoding determines the value of each bit by relying on the majority vote of its neighboring bits in the Tanner graph of the code. While computationally efficient, this approach does not fully exploit the reliability information of incoming messages, limiting its error correction performance. The reliability-based IMLGD algorithms address this limitation to certain extent, which improve the performance by weighting the votes according to the reliability of incoming messages [13], [14]. Compared with the BP-based decoding algorithms, the reliability-based IMLGD algorithms have lower decoding complexity and reduced hardware overhead. Hence, these algorithms are particularly suitable for ReRAM

1558-2558 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KONG et al.: SPR-IMLGD ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES IN ReRAM SYSTEMS

2019

systems, since they can meet stringent performance requirements while maintaining practical implementation feasibility.
To employ the property of ReRAM channels, this letter proposes two sneak path-aware reliability-based IMLGD algorithms for LDPC codes in ReRAM systems. By incorporating the sneak path information into the reliability metrics used in the iterative decoding processes, the proposed algorithms aim to enhance the error correction performance without incurring substantial computational overhead. The effectiveness of the proposed two algorithms is demonstrated through both theoretical analysis and experimental evaluations. Overall, the contributions of this work are twofold:
• By incorporating the sneak path information into the IMLGD algorithm, we propose two sneak path-aware reliability-based IMLGD algorithms, the SPR-IMLGD and ESPR-IMLGD algorithms.
• We demonstrate that the proposed algorithms have better error correction performance in ReRAM systems affected by the SPI.

II. CHANNEL MODEL

Given an M × N ReRAM crossbar array, let Uij denote the cell at the i-th row and j-th column of the array, where 1 ≤ i ≤ M and 1 ≤ j ≤ N . The data stored in the array can be represented by an M × N binary matrix

X = [xij],

(1)

where xij is stored in Uij and xij ∈ {0, 1}. The storage resistance value rij of Uij is given by

rij =

R0, if xij = 0, R1, if xij = 1,

(2)

where R0 denotes the high resistance state and R1 denotes the low resistance state.
The read signal yij through the ReRAM channel is expressed as

yij = rij + nij, 1 ≤ i ≤ M, 1 ≤ j ≤ N,

(3)

where nij is the noise in Uij, modeled as an independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian random variable with zero mean and variance σ2.

For a memory cell Uij where a sneak path occurs, the other three memory cells forming the sneak path loop must satisfy

the following conditions

xij = 0,

(4)

xic1 = xl1c1 = xl1j = 1,

where c1 ̸= j and l1 ̸= i. When the SPI occurs, Uij will be erroneously read as being
in the low resistance state, resulting in a read data value of 1.

The resistance Rs of the cell affected by the sneak path [9] can be represented as

1

1 −1

Rs =

+ R0 3R1

.

(5)

Therefore, the read signals yij through the ReRAM channel

can be rewritten as

  Rs + nij, if xij = 0 and ϵsp = 1, 

yij = R0 + nij , if xij = 0 and ϵsp = 0,

(6)

 

R1

+

nij

,

if xij = 1,

where ϵsp = 1 indicates the occurrence of a sneak path in the memory cell. For details, the reader can refer to [9].

III. SNEAK PATH-AWARE RELIABILITY-BASED IMLGD ALGORITHMS

A. Reliability-Based IMLGD Algorithms

The reliability-based IMLGD algorithms are widely employed for LDPC codes due to their effectiveness in error correction. These algorithms integrate both hard decisions and associated reliability metrics, enabling more informed decoding, especially in noisy environments [13]. In addition, their low-complexity merit makes them highly suitable for efficient hardware implementation, as they leverage bit confidence levels without the computational overhead of softdecision processing.1 In particular, the hard reliability-based iterative MLGD (HRB-IMLGD) algorithm enhances traditional majority-logic decoding by using hard decision results as reliability metrics. This makes it particularly useful in systems where computational efficiency is critical, as it avoids the complicated computations in the BP-based LDPC decoding while still providing significant performance gains.
Suppose the LDPC matrix H has uniform column weight γ. Define Rj(0) as the initial reliability information for the j-th bit, with value zj, which is given by

Rj(0) =

+γ, if zj = 1, −γ, otherwise.

(7)

Starting with Rj(0), the HRB-IMLGD algorithm iteratively updates the bit reliability according to

Rj(k+1) = Rj(k) + Ej(k),

(8)

where the extrinsic information Ej(k) is computed as

Ej(k) =

2σi(,kj) − 1 ,

(9)

i∈Mj

where Mj is the set of check nodes connected to the j-th bit node in the Tanner graph of H, and σi(,kj) represents the extrinsic information from the i-th check node to the j-th bit
node at iteration k. The HRB-IMLGD algorithm is described
in Algorithm 1.

B. SPR-IMLGD Algorithm
In this subsection, we propose the SPR-IMLGD algorithm, which enhances the HRB-IMLGD algorithm by incorporating soft reliability metrics and adaptive adjustments to mitigate the SPI of ReRAM systems. The reliability update of the proposed algorithm is based on both the hard decision and the SPI detection, allowing for more efficient handling of noisy ReRAM environments.
Define the following sets:
IRs = {(i, j) : argminr∈{R0,R1,Rs}(yij − r)2 = Rs}, (10) IR0 = {(i, j) : argminr∈{R0,R1,Rs}(yij − r)2 = R0}, (11)
1We mention that the hard reliability-based IMLGD algorithm is closely related to the Gallager B algorithm, from which a binary message passing (BMP) decoding algorithm [15] can be obtained by incorporating soft reliability information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Algorithm 1 HRB-IMLGD Algorithm

1: Initialize: Set iteration count k = 0, maximum number of

iterations Kmax and z(0). Initialize the reliability Rj(0) for

each bit zj (0 ≤ j < n) according to (7)

2: while k < Kmax do

3: Step 1: Syndrome Check

4: Compute the syndrome vector: s(k) = z(k)HT

5: if s(k) = 0 then

6:

Output z(k) as the decoded codeword and terminate

7: end if

8: Step 2: Reliability Update

9: for each bit zj do 10: Update the reliability according to (8)

11: end for

12: Step 3: Hard Decision Update

13: for each bit zj do

14:

Update the hard decision by assigning zj(k+1) to 0 if

Rj(k+1) ≤ 0, or to 1 if Rj(k+1) > 0

15: end for

16: Set k = k + 1

17: end while

18: Step 4: Iteration Limit Check

19: if k = Kmax then 20: Decoding failure

21: end if

and
IR1 = {(i, j) : argminr∈{R0,R1,Rs}(yij − r)2 = R1}. (12)
Actually, IRs , IR0 , and IR1 are the sets of cell indices whose read signals yij are closest to Rs, R0, and R1, respectively.
Let

NRs =

N (yij),

(13)

(i,j)∈IRs

and

NR0 =

N (yij),

(i,j)∈IR0

(14)

where N (·) denotes the normalization function. The sneak path probability psp quantifies the degree to which
the resistance values of storage units in a ReRAM system are affected by sneak paths. Based on (13) and (14), it is estimated by [8]

psp

=

NRs

.

NRs + NR0

(15)

The value of psp reflects the extent to which the resistance

value deviates from certain reference resistances, which in turn

affects the bit reliability. A higher psp typically indicates that

the resistance value of the storage unit is more significantly

influenced by sneak paths, which may lead to higher decoding

errors. Thus, we define the sneak path distance for the cell Uij

d = e − p . sp
ij

(yij −Rs)2−(yij −R1)2 2σ2

sp

(16)

The sneak path probability psp measures the overall impact of sneak paths on the storage units. In contrast, our defined

Algorithm 2 SPR-IMLGD Algorithm

1: Initialize: Set iteration count k = 0, maximum number

of iterations Kmax
2: Step 1: Compute Sneak Path Distance 3: For each cell Uij, compute the sneak path distance dsipj
based on (15) and (16)

4: Step 2: Hard Decision Using Sneak Path Distance 5: Initialize the matrix z(0) for each bit zij based on (17)
6: Step 3: Initialization of Sneak Path Reliability 7: Initialize the reliability Ri(j0) for each bit zij using (18) 8: while k < Kmax do
9: Step 4: Syndrome Check 10: Compute the syndrome vector: s(k) = V(z)(k)HT,

where V(·) denotes the transformation of a matrix into

a vector by reading its entries row by row

11: if s(k) = 0 then

12:

Output V(z)(k) as the decoded codeword and stop

13: end if

14: Step 5: Reliability Update with Sneak Path Adjustment

15: for each bit zij do

16: Update the reliability according to the sneak path influence using Ri(jk+1) = Ri(jk) + Ei(jk)
17: end for

18: Step 6: Hard Decision Update

19: for each bit zij do

20:

Update the hard decision by assigning zi(jk+1) to 0 if

Ri(jk+1) ≤ 0, or to 1 if Ri(jk+1) > 0

21: end for

22: Set k = k + 1

23: end while

24: Step 7: Iteration Limit Check

25: if k = Kmax then

26: Decoding failure

27: end if

sneak path distance dispj provides a more specific indication of the presence and extent of sneak paths within a given storage

unit Uij. Based on the sneak path distance dsipj, the initial hard
decision zi(j0) for the cell Uij is determined as

zi(j0) =

1, if dsipj > 0, 0, if dsipj ≤ 0.

(17)

The initial reliability of the bit zij is

Ri(j0) =

−βsp, if (i, j) ∈ IR0 , +βsp, otherwise.

(18)

In general, the parameter βsp should not be larger than γ, which is the initial bit reliability in the traditional HRB-IMLGD algorithm. In addition, the choice of βsp is independent on γ, but rather in consideration of the SPI in ReRAM channels. In order to cope with the SPI, βsp should be adjusted according to the specific channel condition and interference strength. In our experiments, βsp is set to 3 and 4 to evaluate its impact on the decoding performance. Below are
the details of the proposed SPR-IMLGD algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KONG et al.: SPR-IMLGD ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES IN ReRAM SYSTEMS
TABLE I COMPARISON OF COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITIES FOR
DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS

2021

C. ESPR-IMLGD Algorithm

To further quantify the impact of sneak paths on the IMLGD

performance, we propose an enhanced version of the SPR-

IMLGD algorithm, termed ESPR-IMLGD algorithm. The

main difference between the SPR-IMLGD and ESPR-IMLGD

algorithms is in Step 3, while all other steps remain the same.

To be specific, in the ESPR-IMLGD algorithm, the initial

reliability of the bit zij is given by



 −βsp, 

if (i, j) ∈ IR0 ,

Ri(j0)

=

 +βsp,

  

−

βsp

,

if (i, j) ∈ IR1 , otherwise.

(19)

2

Fig. 1. BER performance for different decoding algorithms (Kmax = 10).

D. Complexity Analysis

We know from (16) that computing the sneak path distance for each bit involves 4 binary additions, 3 multiplications, and 1 exponentiation, leading to high computational complexity. By performing a first-order Taylor series expansion on the right-hand side of (16), we derive

dispj

≈

R1

− σ2

Rs

yij

+1−

psp

−

(R1

− Rs)(Rs 4σ2

+ R1) .

(20)

Define

dsipj∗

=

σ2 R1 − Rs

× dsipj .

(21)

Equation (20) can be rewritten as

dispj∗ ≈ ⌊yij ⌋ +

Rs

σ2 −

R1

psp

−

R1

+ 4

Rs

,

(22)

where ⌊·⌋ denotes the floor function. Compared with (16),

the computational complexity of the sneak path distance

using (22) is reduced.

From (18) and (19), it is known that initializing the relia-

bility information for each bit requires 5 integer comparison

operations.

In

(22),

σ2 Rs −R1

psp

−

R1

+Rs 4

is

a

constant

that

can

be

computed in advance and stored, which remains the same for

all bits. Therefore, when calculating the distance dispj* for each

bit, only a single integer comparison operation is required.

Table I provides the computational complexities per itera-

tion for different decoding algorithms, where ζ represents the

total number of ones in the parity-check matrix H. Compared

to the HRB-IMLGD algorithm, the proposed SPR-IMLGD and

ESPR-IMLGD algorithms introduce only 1 extra integer com-

parison operation per bit for calculating sneak path distances

during each iteration, resulting in little additional overhead.

Additionally, initializing the reliability information for each

bit requires 5 integer comparison operations. Consequently,

despite the extra operations introduced, the overall increase in

computational complexity is nearly negligible. Given the fact

that the code length is relatively small in ReRAM systems,

the proposed algorithms are practically efficient.

Fig. 2. FER performance for different decoding algorithms (Kmax = 10).
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the performance comparisons of the proposed decoding algorithms are evaluated on ReRAM channels with the SPI, in which no detector is employed for the low processing latency. In the simulations, we use the (255,175) EG-LDPC code from [16] with code rate 0.69 and code length 255. The maximum number Kmax of iterations is set to 10 and the sneak path probability psp is set to 0.01. The resistances R0 and R1 are configured to 1000Ω and 100Ω, respectively, which are consistent with the values used in [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], and [10].
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 illustrate the bit error rate (BER) and frame error rate (FER) performance comparisons of the EG-LDPC code with the proposed SPR-IMLGD and ESPR-IMLGD algorithms for different values of βsp, respectively. For comparison purposes, the HRB-IMLGD algorithm in [13], the BP decoding algorithm and the BMP decoding algorithm in [15] are also evaluated.
As shown in the two figures, the proposed two decoding algorithms outperform the HRB-IMLGD algorithm. As an example, our proposed ESPR-IMLGD algorithm and SPRIMLGD algorithm can improve the BER performance by more than four orders of magnitude and one order of magnitude compared with the HRB-IMLGD algorithm, respectively, when σ = 34 and βsp = 3. As βsp increases, these two algorithms can achieve nearly five orders of magnitude and more than two orders of magnitude improvements compared with the HRB-IMLGD algorithm, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2022

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

path distance to adjust the bit reliability information in the decoding.

Fig. 3. The average number of iterations for different decoding algorithms (Kmax = 10).

V. CONCLUSION
We have proposed two sneak path-aware reliability-based IMLGD algorithms for decoding LDPC codes in ReRAM systems affected by the SPI. Simulation results have confirmed that both algorithms can outperform the existing methods at the expense of little computational complexity increase. These results have highlighted the effectiveness of the proposed approaches in enhancing the robustness of ReRAM systems and have provided a promising solution to mitigate the challenges posed by the SPI in future memory technologies. As a future work, we will study how to optimize the parameters of the proposed algorithms via theoretical methods.

When βsp = 3, the BP decoding algorithm performs slightly better than the SPR-IMLGD algorithm in the low noise variance region (σ < 36), but its BER is still higher than the ESPR-IMLGD algorithm. As the noise variance increases (σ > 36), however, the BP decoding algorithm outperforms both the SPR-IMLGD algorithm and the ESPR-IMLGD algorithm. When βsp = 4, the SPR-IMLGD algorithm and the ESPR-IMLGD algorithm can both outperform the BP decoding algorithm. The results indicate that the performance of the BP decoding algorithm significantly degrades in ReRAM channels due to the SPI. This degradation is consistent with the previous studies and highlights the specific challenges posed by sneak paths in such channels. Our results also demonstrate that the proposed two algorithms effectively mitigate the SPI, which leads to improved decoding performance.
The figures also show that the BMP decoding algorithm outperforms the HRB-IMLGD algorithm but is inferior to the other decoding techniques. We think this performance degradation can also be attributed to the SPI in ReRAM channels, which severely limits the effectiveness of BMP.
Fig. 3 compares the average number of iterations of these algorithms for different values of σ. As shown in Fig. 3, the proposed algorithms converge faster than the HRB-IMLGD algorithm. In addition, the average number of iterations of the proposed ESPR-IMLGD algorithm is slightly higher than that of the proposed SPR-IMLGD algorithm. However, the ESPR-IMLGD algorithm has a considerable BER/FER performance gain. Notably, the average number of iterations of the BMP decoding algorithm is comparable to that of the proposed algorithms. Although the BP decoding algorithm has the lowest average number of iterations, its performance is severely degraded compared with the proposed algorithms if βsp is 4.
Based on Fig. 1 to Fig. 3, when βsp increases from 3 to 4, the decoding performance results of the proposed two algorithms are improved at the expense of slight decrease in the convergence speed. For example, compared with the proposed SPR-IMLGD algorithm, the proposed ESPR-IMLGD algorithm achieves a BER/FER performance gain of up to two orders of magnitude when σ = 34. All these suggest the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms that use the sneak

REFERENCES
[1] D. B. Strukov, G. S. Snider, D. R. Stewart, and R. S. Williams, “The missing memristor found,” Nature, vol. 453, no. 7191, pp. 80–83, May 2008.
[2] P. Li, K. Cai, G. Song, and Z. Mei, “Sneak path interference-aware adaptive detection and decoding for resistive memory arrays,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 2032–2036, Sep. 2022.
[3] Y. Cassuto, S. Kvatinsky, and E. Yaakobi, “Information-theoretic sneakpath mitigation in memristor crossbar arrays,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 4801–4813, Sep. 2016.
[4] Y. Ben-Hur and Y. Cassuto, “Detection and coding schemes for sneakpath interference in resistive memory arrays,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 3821–3833, Jun. 2019.
[5] Z. Chen, C. Schoeny, and L. Dolecek, “Pilot assisted adaptive thresholding for sneak-path mitigation in resistive memories with failed selection devices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 66–81, Jan. 2020.
[6] X. Zhong, K. Cai, G. Song, and N. Raghavan, “Deep learning based detection for mitigating sneak path interference in resistive memory arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron.-Asia (ICCE-Asia), Seoul, South Korea, Nov. 2020, pp. 1–4.
[7] X. Zhong, K. Cai, G. Song, W. Wang, and Y. Zhu, “Constrained coding and deep learning aided threshold detection for resistive memories,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 803–807, Apr. 2022.
[8] G. Song, K. Cai, C. Sun, X. Zhong, and J. Cheng, “Near-optimal detection for both data and sneak-path interference in resistive memories with random cell selector failures,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 836–850, Feb. 2022.
[9] C. Sun, K. Cai, G. Song, T. Q. S. Quek, and Z. Fei, “Belief propagation based joint detection and decoding for resistive random access memories,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 2227–2239, Apr. 2022.
[10] B. Dai, K. Cai, Z. Mei, and X. Zhong, “Polar code construction for resistive memories with sneak-path interference,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 1765–1769, Aug. 2024.
[11] M. Kim and J. Ha, “Sneak path aware bit-flipping algorithm for ReRAM crossbar array,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. Converg. (ICTC), Jeju Island, South Korea, Oct. 2022, pp. 451–454.
[12] Q. Pang, Z. Ma, and X. Tang, “Unreliability normalization weighted bit-flipping algorithms of LDPC decoding for ReRAM systems,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 67, no. 12, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 229304.
[13] Q. Huang, J. Kang, L. Zhang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Two reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 3597–3606, Dec. 2009.
[14] C. Wang, J. Li, L. Kong, F. Shu, and F. C. M. Lau, “Adaptive 2-D scheduling-based nonbinary majority-logic decoding for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Exp. Briefs, vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 1349–1353, Jul. 2020.
[15] G. Lechner, T. Pedersen, and G. Kramer, “Analysis and design of binary message passing decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 601–607, Mar. 2012.
[16] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:56:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

