2025 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE)

2025 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE) | 979-8-3315-5736-2/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/QCE65121.2025.10460

Graph Dilution for Decoding Surface Codes
Boqing Zhang† Siyuan Niu§ †Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA §Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA

Abstract—We present a low-complexity belief propagation (BP) decoding strategy for surface codes by dynamically diluting the decoding graphs based on both BP soft messages and the underlying topological product structure. Analytically, we show that the structural dilution breaks dominant short cycles of the decoding graphs while preserving the original distance of surface codes. Numerical results demonstrate that standard BP on these dynamically diluting graphs achieves a 9% threshold under Pauli-X noise, closely matching the 9.1% threshold of BP-OSD. Notably, the proposed soft decoder with almost linear complexity effectively solves the BP non-convergence issue under the code capacity noise model without introducing any postprocessing or heuristic adaptation, making it a highly promising candidate for efficient hardware implementation in real-time quantum decoding under circuit-level noise.
I. INTRODUCTION
Belief Propagation (BP) is a commonly used decoding algorithm for classical low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Yet, it encounters significant non-convergence issues when directly applied to quantum LDPC codes. This is because BP is effective on random graphs that exhibit the locally treelike property [1], whereas quantum codes must have sufficient structure to ensure commutativity. This structure, in turn, induces code degeneracy and abundant short cycles within the decoding graph. For quantum LDPC codes, the topological product structure is a defining feature. Although numerous methods have been proposed to improve BP decoding performance by combining BP with post-processing techniques, these methods increase decoder complexity and often rely on heuristic components that are unaware of the code structure.
This work proposes a low-complexity soft decoding strategy based on BP that is both theoretically grounded and simple to implement, particularly suited for real-time implementation on hardware platforms such as FPGAs. Using surface codes as an example, we develop a dilution method that dynamically sparsifies the decoding graph by leveraging the product structure of the code. This reduces short cycles while preserving worstcase error-correcting capability, making the decoding graph dynamically locally tree-like, which promotes BP convergence without compromising the logical performance.
The simulations confirm that BP on the diluting decoding graphs substantially outperforms BP on the original decoding graphs in terms of both convergence rate and total error rate. Numerical results reveal that, without any additional postprocessing, standard BP achieves a threshold of 9.0% under X noise, comparable to the BP-OSD-0 threshold of 9.1% ± 0.2% [2]. Importantly, the computational complexity remains consistent with the almost linear standard BP complexity.

II. GRAPH SPARSIFICATION AND DILUTION
The graph dilution method exploits the quantum degeneracy, a property that distinguishes quantum decoding from its classical counterpart. In quantum codes, degeneracy refers to the phenomenon where two error corrections are considered equivalent by the decoder if their composition forms a stabilizer. As a result, unlike in classical decoding, it is not necessary to retain a representation for every qubit in the decoding graph to achieve successful decoding. This insight enables the structured sparsification (see Definition 1) to promote BP convergence while maintaining control over logical errors.
Definition 1 (Graph s-Sparsifications of Surface Codes). A ssparsification removes s consecutive lines of edges and retains the (s + 1)-th line of the original graph G. See Figure 1.

Figure 1. Examples of a horizontal 1-sparsifications (left), a vertical 1-sparsifications (middle) and a diagonal 1-sparsification (right)
Not only does the above sparsifications remove the dominant short cycles, but Theorem 1 also shows that sparsifying with respect to the code structure effectively controls the increase in logical error rate, regardless of the code size. Specifically, it provides an upper bound on the correctability loss δ as defined in Definition 2 incurred when decoding on sparsified graphs.

Definition 2 (Correctability Loss). The correctability loss δ of

a sparsified decoding graph Gs relative to the original graph

G is defined as:

t(G) − t(Gs)

δ=

(1)

t(G)

where t(G) and t(Gs) represents the error-correcting radius by decoding on original graph G and sparsfied graph Gs.

Theorem 1. Fix a sparsification ratio s ∈ N, for any surface code with the sparsified decoding graph Gs obtained from the
above s-sparsification, we have for the correctability loss δ(s):

s+1

s−1

δD(s), δV

(s)

⩽

s

+

, 3

δH (s)

⩽

. s+3

(2)

where δD, δV and δH are the correctability losses of diagonal, vertical, and horizontal sparsification, respectively. From Theorem 1, the loss in worst-case error-correcting capability due to sparsification is independent of the code size N and depends only on the sparsification ratio. This creates

979-8-3315-5736-2/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE

590

DOI 10.1109/QCE65121.2025.10460

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:58:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2. Summary of BP performance under graph dilution (d = 15). (Left) Non-convergence rates of BP on sparsified graphs with different sparsification ratios s under varying X error rates p. The "h" and "v" labels indicate horizontal and vertical sparsification methods, respectively. (Middle) Frame Error Rate, including both logical errors and non-convergence errors, for BP decoding on dynamically diluting graphs with s0 = 0, s1 = 1, s2 = 3 over X error. (Right) Average number of BP iterations required for convergence on diluting graphs.

a natural trade-off: increasing s improves convergence but reduces error-correcting capability. We can therefore dynamically dilute the decoding graph by gradually increasing the s during the decoding process to achieve the best performance.
Definition 3 (Graph Dilution of Surface Codes). Let {s0, s1, . . . , sT } be an increasing sequence of sparsification ratios. Graph dilution refers to the dynamic process of progressively sparsifying the decoding graph G over T +1 discrete stages during decoding. At the i-th stage (0 ⩽ i ⩽ T ), the graph is replaced by its si-sparsified version Gsi . See Figure 4.

Algorithm 1: BP on the Structurally Diluting Graph Input: Increasing sequence of sparsification ratios
{s0, s1, . . . , sT } and iterations {I0, I1, . . . , It} 1 for i ∈ [T ] do 2 Run standard BP on Gsi for Ii iterations 3 Decimate qubits supported on G\Gsi+1
graph exhibits three distinct peaks, while BP on the original graph gradually diminishes. This indicates that each stage of dilution unlocks a substantial new set of instances where BP converges.

Figure3. Example of horizontal graph dilution: the graph is gradually diluted from s0 = 0 (left) to s1 = 1 (middle) and s2 = 3 (right).
Analytical Properties of Graph Dilution: For each surface code of size N , consider a finite sequence of diluted decoding graphs {GNs0 , GNs1 , . . . , GNsT }, where T denotes the final stage of dilution. This sequence satisfies the following properties:
1) Dynamically Locally Tree-Like: For any i < j ⩽ T , the graph GNsj exhibits greater girth than GNsi .
2) Existence of Correction: For each i ⩽ T , there exists a correction supported on GNsi that matches the syndrome.
3) Bounded Correctability Loss: The correctability loss δ is bounded above independently of N .
Intuitively, the first analytical property shows that the structured dilution of the graph benefits BP convergence, while the latter two indicate that this convergence gain does not come at a significant cost to logical performance.
III. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION
Having examined the analytical properties of the diluted graph, we now present the practical decoding algorithm in Algorithm 1. At each dilution stage, we perform decimation on the diluted qubits, which simply means fixing these qubits to 0 or 1 based on the returned soft BP messages.
From the left of Figure 2, we numerically confirm that sparser decoding graphs lead to better BP convergence. Moreover, the histogram in Figure 4 shows that BP on the diluting

Figure4. Histogram of BP iterations until convergence for the d = 15 surface code at threshold. Blue, orange, and green bars show BP on the original, first-stage (s = 1) and second-stage (s = 3) diluted graphs, respectively. The red line shows the baseline without dilution.
For overall decoding performance, running BP on diluting graphs—without any post-processing— achieves a 9.0% threshold under X noise, as shown in the middle plot of Figure 2. This is comparable to the BP-OSD threshold. In terms of complexity, the decoder has a worst-case complexity of O(N 3/2), while the average-case complexity remains close to linear, particularly in the low-error regime. To conclude, this work proposes dilution methods tailored to the structure of surface codes and shows that these methods resolve the BP non-convergence issue without inducing additional complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Mezard and A. Montanari, Information, physics, and computation. Oxford University Press, 2009.
[2] J. Roffe, D. R. White, S. Burton, and E. Campbell, “Decoding across the quantum low-density parity-check code landscape,” Physical Review Research, vol. 2, no. 4, p. 043423, 2020.

591 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:58:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

