3546

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

RaPC: Raw Bit Error Rate Aware Polar Coding for 3-D NAND Flash Memory
Ruifeng Tu, Meng Zhang , Changsheng Xie, Member, IEEE, and Fei Wu , Member, IEEE,

Abstract—Reliability challenges like random telegraph noise (RTN) and intercell electrostatic interference have gotten worse as feature sizes in planar NAND flash memory continue to reduce. In order to improve storage capacity, 3-D stacking of NAND flash memory has emerged as the preferred development path. However, additional challenges are brought about by the switch to 3-D NAND flash, such as shorter lifespans and lower reliability as a result of higher integration densities and intricate vertical interference. This article proposes RaPC: a raw bit error rate (RBER) aware polar coding scheme for improving data reliability of 3-D NAND flash memory. According to the variation of the RBER, the error correction ability of the polar code is dynamically adjusted to correct bit errors, which ensures the reliability and reduces the decoding delay. Simulation results demonstrate that RaPC offers significant advantages in decoding latency and performance over conventional low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes within specific RBER ranges, making it a promising solution for enhancing the reliability of 3-D NAND flash memory.
Index Terms—3-D NAND flash, error correction performance, polar code, raw bit error rate (RBER), reliability.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ELIABILITY issues including random telegraph noise (RTN) and intercell electrostatic interference have become exacerbated in planar NAND flash memory as a result of the progressive reduction in feature sizes [1]. To further increase the storage capacity, industry attention has rapidly shifted to 3-D stacking technology. The number of stacking in 3-D NAND flash memory has grown from the original 24 layers to more than 200 layers and even higher with the steady improvement of stacking technology [2].
3-D NAND flash memory’s storage density and capacity have been progressively increasing [3]. Due to its superior
Received 22 September 2024; revised 25 December 2024; accepted 29 January 2025. Date of publication 10 February 2025; date of current version 22 August 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2804303; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62372197, and Grant U22A2071; in part by the Joint Fund for Intelligent Computing of Shandong Natural Science Foundation under Grant ZR2023LZH007; and in part by the Key Laboratory of Information Storage System, and Engineering Research Center of Data Storage Systems and Technology, Ministry of Education of China. This article was recommended by Associate Editor A. Aminifar. (Corresponding author: Meng Zhang.)
Ruifeng Tu and Meng Zhang are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn).
Changsheng Xie and Fei Wu are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: csxie@hust.edu.cn; wufei@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2025.3540375

performance and storage capacity, it has been widely used in a variety of scenarios, including data centers and servers, to satisfy the demands of the big data era. In the storage market, 3-D NAND flash memory-based large-capacity solidstate drives have swiftly supplanted mechanical hard disk drives [4].
For 3-D NAND flash memory, charge trap (CT) cells are generally used, as opposed to the typical floating gate cells present in regular planar NAND flash memory. The increased integration density of 3-D NAND flash memory arrays nevertheless comes at the cost of a shorter lifespan and lower reliability, even though this somewhat lessens electron escape. On the one hand, the threshold voltage distribution window for each state is compressed as storage technology advances from single-level cell (SLC) to triple-level cell (TLC), quad-level cell (QLC) [5], penta-level cell (PLC), and even hexa-level cell (HLC) [6], [7]. This causes more overlapping states and necessitates the use of additional read reference voltages [8]. This has a negative effect on performance and reliability. Moreover, because of the interlayer variances specific to the 3-D structure, the additional layers result in more complex vertical interference and variations, which cause error characteristics different from those of planar NAND flash [9]. Because of this, it needs to offer more focused reliability solutions that take into account the features of 3-D NAND flash memory.
Error correction codes (ECC) are widely used to improve data reliability for NAND flash memory. By encoding data with ECC before writing and decoding it during read operations, ECC fixes incorrect bits introduced during storage. Two popular ECC solutions are the extensively utilized low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [10], [11] and the previously widely used Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes [12]. LDPC codes have drawn a lot of interest because of its superior error-correction capabilities [13]. The strong error correction capability and decoding performance approaching the Shannon limit have made it a mainstream ECC solution. However, constructing the LDPC code with an appropriate parity-check matrix is a challenging task that requires consideration of multiple factors, such as the code rate, error-correcting performance, and decoding complexity. Moreover, increasing the code block length results in higher storage and computational complexity.
Polar codes are the first constructive coding scheme, which has been shown through rigorous mathematical methods to attain channel capacity because of their distinctive structure.
The encoding and decoding complexity are relatively low, and
it demonstrates decent error floor behavior. Researchers have

1937-4151 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TU et al.: RaPC: RBER AWARE POLAR CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3547

also taken notice of this, which has resulted in investigations into the effectiveness and application of polar codes as ECC for flash memory [14], [15].
However, planar flash memory is the main focus of current work on polar codes, and the decoding algorithms are frequently restricted to soft decoding techniques already in use in the communications industry, ignoring the distinctive error characteristics of 3-D NAND flash memory. Therefore, by borrowing the concept of dynamic ECC in 3-D NAND flash memory [16], [17], we propose RaPC: a raw bit error rate (RBER) aware polar code scheme. By sensing the range of RBER, RaPC dynamically adjusts the list length of the successive cancellation list (SCL) decoding algorithm to better match the characteristics of 3-D NAND flash memory and achieve a balance among error rate, latency, and overhead. The proposed RaPC strategy shows superior decoding performance within a certain range of RBER and notable improvements in decoding latency when compared to conventional LDPC codes with the same codeword length and code rate.
To summarize, this article makes the following contributions.
1) Through simulation, it is discovered that the shortened systematic polar codes can not only adapt to the flash memory page size in the channel but also outperforms LDPC codes in some RBER ranges in terms of performance and latency under the same codeword length and code rate.
2) Based on the aforementioned findings, in order to maintain reliability and enhance decoding performance, we propose a RaPC decoding method that continually adjusts the polar code’s error correcting capability in response to changes in RBER.
3) The effectiveness of the proposed RaPC scheme is evaluated by computer simulations. Evaluation results show that when the RBER is more than 9.5 × 10−3, the RaPC scheme outperforms the conventional LDPC strategy in terms of decoding performance.
The structure of this article is as follows. Section II describes the background of NAND flash memory and polar codes. Section III gives the motivation of this article. The RaPC scheme is presented in detail in Section IV. Section V gives the simulation results and analysis. The conclusion is made in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
This section first provides an explanation of the structure of 3-D NAND flash memory, the channel model, and error types, and then reviews the fundamental concepts of polar codes.
A. 3-D NAND Flash Memory Structure
In planar flash memory, floating-gate metal-oxidesemiconductor field-effect transistors are the smallest storage cell. Nonetheless, 3-D structure favors charge-trap storage cells because of their excellent scalability and reduced cell size [18]. Fig. 1(a) shows the storage cell structure. The type of cell determines the voltage distribution that corresponds to it; popular types include SLC, multilevel cell (MLC), TLC

Fig. 1. Storage cell structure (a) and voltage distribution (b) of MLC NAND flash memory.
Fig. 2. 3-D NAND flash cell array (a) and vertical stack structure (b).
[19], etc. In the subsequent study, MLC is used as an example to improve the clarity of the portrayal. Two bits can be mapped to MLC cells, commonly known as most significant bit (MSB) and least significant bit (LSB). and Fig. 1(b) depicts the corresponding threshold voltage distribution, where Pi represents the probability density function of different bit states and Vrefi represents the read reference voltage.
A wordline connects many cells of flash memory to create a page, which is the smallest unit used to read and write data. A block is made up of several pages. The flash block is the smallest unit that carries out the erase operation since all of the memory cells in a block share the same substrate [20]. A flash plane is made up of several blocks, each of which has its own separate data and cache registers. A logical unit number (LUN) is the smallest unit for receiving and executing orders, which includes a comprehensive internal structure and pin specification.
Fig. 2 illustrates how memory cells are stacked together to overcome the constraints provided by planar NAND flash memory. Additionally, manufacturers are going from starting with 24 layers to more than 200 layers [21]. Although the storage capacity has increased due to sophisticated techniques, the reliability of 3-D NAND flash has decreased [22].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3548

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 3. NAND flash channel model (a) and the threshold voltage (b) after being disturbed by different retention time noise.

B. NAND Flash Interference Sources
Many factors, such as program disturb noise [23], read disturb noise [24], data retention noise [25], and so on, can cause interference in flash memory. The amount of charge in the storage layer affects the data stored in each flash cell. This energy disperses and lessens with time. Errors are introduced when the logical state of the storage is inverted due to a threshold-crossing charge loss. Furthermore, there is a large rise in charge loss-related data retention errors when storage cells are electrically separated to hold different logical states.
This study uses the flash channel model, which is developed from [26], and it focuses on the data retention noise, which is the primary source of noise. Fig. 3(a) illustrates the NAND flash channel model.
In order to demonstrate the impact of retention noise on the threshold voltage distribution, we set the parameter program/erase (P/E) cycles to 104 and alter the retention time t (s). The corresponding variations in the threshold voltage distribution are displayed in Fig. 3(b), where t is represented by the colors black, blue, green, and magenta, respectively, as 0s, 106s, 107s, and 108s. It is evident that as the retention period grows, there is an increase in the voltage offset and the cross area between the voltage distributions.
Since it is difficult to determine which of the two nearby states it is, the RBER comes primarily from the scenario when the threshold voltage distribution crosses. In order to improve the reliability of the data and the correctness of the judgment in the overlap area, we thus employ the nonuniform sensing method to concentrate the read reference voltage in the overlap area. As illustrated in Fig. 4, we apply three read reference voltages at the overlap area.
Assuming that the probability distribution function of Pi is: FPi (x), the left and right boundary of the ith (i ∈ {1, 2, 3}) overlap area, Bl(i) and Br(i) can be calculated by the following formula:

Fpi−1 Bl(i)

Fpi Br(i)

=

= K.

(1)

Fpi Bl(i)

Fpi−1 Br(i)

Fig. 4. Nonuniform sensing strategy for the overlapping region of two adjacent threshold voltage distributions.

The sensed voltage Vth must be between some two reference threshold voltages (Vl, Vr).
As the input to the polar code decoding, likelihood ratio (LLR) information is in reality essential, and it is greatly influenced by retention time and P/E cycles in the flash memory channel. The LLR approximation for all threshold voltages Vth in this range can be obtained according to the formulas (2) and (3) as well as the 3-D flash channel model [26]

LLR(MSB) = log

VR Vl

Fp2 (x)dx

+

VR Vl

Fp0 (x)dx

+

VR Vl

Fp3 (x)dx

VR Vl

Fp1 (x)dx

(2)

LLR(LSB) = log

VR Vl

Fp1 (x)dx

+

VR Vl

Fp0 (x)dx

+

VR Vl
VR Vl

Fp2 (x)dx Fp3 (x)dx

.

(3)

The polar code decoding algorithm can employ the nine read reference voltages and ten associated LLR values for each of the MSB and LSB that can be derived through calculation as soft information inputs.

C. Polar Code Theory
The combining and splitting of the channel [27], [28], as illustrated in Fig. 5, provide the theoretical foundation for the polar codes. The structure can be built from a base structure with the codeword length N = 2. In this article, the bits of input information are denoted by ui, the codeword length is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TU et al.: RaPC: RBER AWARE POLAR CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3549

Fig. 5. Recursive channel combining and splitting scheme.

indicated by N, the bits received are denoted by yi, and the

bit reversal permutation is represented by 2N.

After merging an assortment of N independent channels W

to create the channel WN, it needs to divide the channel WN

into a X i−1,

group of N binary-input channels WN(i) :X → YN × 1 ≤ i ≤ N, as determined by the transition probability

(4) [28]

WN(i) y1N , u1i−1|ui =

1 2N−1 WN

yN1 |uN1

(4)

uiN+1∈X N−i

where (y1N , u1i−1|ui) represents the output of channel WN(i) and ui is input. The polarization phenomenon is displayed by the channel WN(i), that is, when N goes to infinity, the capacity of some channels tends to 0 while the capacity of others tends to 1. Polar codes use the reliable channel to send information bits and the erratic channel to send frozen bits, which are often 0, enhancing the transmission reliability of information in this way.
The successive cancellation (SC) algorithm [28] and cyclic redundancy check aided-SCL (CA-SCL) algorithm [29] are the decoding methods for polar codes that are more frequently employed. After the binary bits are sent over the channel, the decoding input is the LLR information, which is computed based on the relevant channel parameters. They can both be thought of as decoding trees, with the root node serving as the beginning point for the decoding process. The decoding tree is equivalent to a complete binary tree of depth N, which proceeds downward from the root node through N decisions. The judgment’s foundation is displayed in formula

uˆi =

hi yN1 , uˆ1i−1 , i ∈ A ui, i ∈ Ac

(5)

where A is the indexed set of information bits, Ac is the

indexed set of frozen bits, and uˆi denotes the estimated value

of ui. When ui is an information bit, the judgment function is

⎧

hi y1N , uˆ1i−1

=

⎨ ⎩

0, 1,

LN(i) LN(i)

y1N , uˆ1i−1 yN1 , uˆ1i−1

≥0 < 0.

(6)

During the decoding process, the SC algorithm selects the side with a greater transition probability value each time, keeping only the unique decoding path. Based on this, the SCL algorithm increases the number of paths that are retained, and each downward path expansion keeps up to L types of results. The paths are chosen based on the evaluation of the path metrics (PM) value provided by formulas

i

PMl(i)

ln 1 + exp − 1 − 2uˆj[l] · LN(j)

(7)

j=1

LN(j)[l]

=

ln

WN(i) WN(i)

yN1 , uˆ1i−1[l]|0 yN1 , uˆ1i−1[l]|1

.

(8)

l denotes the current path, then for two distinct paths l1 and l2 ∈ {1, 2, . . . , L}, a relation (9) holds when PM1 > PM2
WN(i) yN1 , uˆ1i−1[l1]|uˆi1[l1] < WN(i) y1N , uˆ1i−1[l2]|uˆ1i [l2] . (9)

This indicates that when a path corresponds to a larger transition probability, the PM value is smaller. The SCL algorithm selects the L paths with smaller PM values for retention when the number of paths expands to 2L. Based on the SCL algorithm and cascaded with a cyclic redundancy check (CRC), the CA-SCL decoding method adds the CRC check to all decoded paths, hence choosing the most reliable paths among the L candidate paths that pass the CRC check.
By losing some decoding capabilities, the Fast-SCL decoding algorithm chooses specific nodes to cut down on decoding latency. Lower decoding delay results from this tradeoff. It is a balanced decision to use both decoding strategies for RaPC. RaPC can be easily modified to satisfy various user needs by providing two decoding algorithms with distinct goals, expanding the range of situations in which the solution can be used. Special nodes like Rate-0, Rate-1, Rep, etc., are encountered when decoding polar codes. It is not required to decode all the way to the decoding tree’s leaf nodes in order to acquire the LLR values when certain exceptional nodes are met. The decoding process is made simple to directly retrieve the LLR value sequence at the special node. This algorithm greatly lowers decoding latency and meets the requirement for faster decoding, albeit a slight loss in decoding performance when compared to traditional CA-SCL.

III. MOTIVATION
The most common ECC now used in flash memory is LDPC codes that are the linear block codes with a particular parity-check matrix sparsity. One of the most crucial factors in the LDPC decoding process is the iteration time. While more iterations can enhance decoding performance, particularly at low signal-to-noise ratios, they also increase decoding complexity since each iteration involves information passing and computation. Because of this feature, the LDPC algorithm performs somewhat worse than expected in terms of decoding delay. Polar codes outperform LDPC codes in short and medium code length decoding, according to studies in the field of 5G communication [30]. This finding supports the usage of polar codes in flash memory scenarios.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3550

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 6. Comparisons of FER (a) and BER (b) of systematic and nonsystematic polar codes at the same codeword length and code rate. We use “Sys” to represent systematic polar code, “Non-Sys” to represent nonsystematic polar code and “SCLn” for the SCL decoding algorithm with a fixed list parameter n.

Theoretically, the linear block codes can be transformed into
a systematic code, whose form has been proposed in [31]. Assuming that the input N bits of the encoder are u1N and
the encoded bits correspond to x1N, the systematic encoding formulas (10) and (11) are as follows:

xB = uAGAB + uA¯ GA¯ B

(10)

xB¯ = uAGAB¯ + uA¯ GA¯ B¯

(11)

where A and B are the sets of information bit positions.
uA and uA¯ denote the user data and frozen data, respectively. In the context of a systematic encoder, the codeword x1N is split into two parts: xB and xB¯ . GAB, GAB¯ , GA¯ B, and GA¯ B¯ are submatrices of the generator matrix GN, where the rows are indexed by A and A¯ , and the columns are indexed by B and B¯ , respectively.
More precisely, when sets A and B have the same number
of elements and GAB is an invertible matrix. For the nonsystematic polar code (uA, uA¯ ), there always exists a systematic polar code (uB, uB¯ ). Then by formula (12), we can compute uA and bring ua back to formulas (10) and (11) to compute x
and get the systematic polar code

uA = xB − uA¯ GA¯ B (GAB)−1.

(12)

Using the same decoding algorithm, we simulate both systematic and nonsystematic polar codes with the same codeword length of L = 8192 and code rate of 0.89. The outcomes are displayed in Fig. 6. It is discovered that while the lowcomplexity encoding and decoding structures of the systematic and nonsystematic polar codes have comparable frame error rates (FER), the systematic polar codes perform noticeably better in terms of bit error rates (BER). Furthermore, nonsystematic polar codes in flash memory devices use a significant amount of the overhead associated with accessing data bits. As a result, this encourages us to use the systematic polar codes, which can enhance performance and be more appropriate for the flash memory channel.
The codeword length of polar codes is fixed as a power of 2 due to its distinctive coding structure. Once the ECC check is

applied in the flash memory, the data length is not a power of 2.

It is required to take into account the shortening or puncturing

if we decide to use polar code as the ECC algorithm for 3-D

NAND flash memory [32].

A few symbols are defined in order to clarify the process

of shortening the polar codes.

1) (N, K) denotes a polar code with the codeword length

N and information bits K.

2) (N, K, K ) denotes a shortened polar code from the

(N, K) polar code, where K is the length to be

shortened.

To obtain the (N, K, K )-shortened systematic polar code,

first set all of the frozen bits of the (N, K)-shorten systematic

polar code to 0. Next, determine the information bits’ location

following bit mixing. Finally, set the final K bits to 0 and

eliminate these K bits. In contrast to the abbreviated system-

atic polar code, the final K bits are not always consecutive

since the information bits following bit mixing are not always

sequential. The code rate is R = (K − K )/(N − K ), and the

actual number of information bits of the (N, K, K ) acquired

by the foregoing approach is K − K .

Furthermore, Fast-SCL [33] and the CA-SCL [29] decoding

algorithm share a similar structure in terms of the decoding

algorithm. For instance, suppose that the corresponding root

node of a particular subcode of length Nsub = 2nsub receives

the the

LLR sequence llr1Nsub . maximum likelihood

The decoder then attempts to decoding result of llr1Nsub as

find well

as a number of “submaximum likelihood decoding results.”

According to [33], it is evident that for certain special

nodes that arise during the decoding process, like Rate-0 (the

corresponding subpolar code has no information bits; all are

frozen bits), Rate-1 (the corresponding subpolar code has no

frozen bits; all are information bits), Rep (the corresponding

subpolar code has only the Nth bit as an information bit; the

remaining bits are all frozen bits), SPC (the corresponding

subpolar code’s first bit is a freeze bit; the remaining bits are

information bits), and so on, can be used to simplify the PM

value calculation with a minimal loss of decoding performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TU et al.: RaPC: RBER AWARE POLAR CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3551

Fig. 7. Comparisons of decoding latency (a) (d), BER (b) (e), and FER (c) (f) using LDPC and polar codes with CA-SCL and Fast-SCL decoding algorithms at the same codeword length and code rate. The FLL-n represents the fixed list length of n.

and a significant reduction in latency. The latency reduction is more noticeable, particularly in the flash memory channel’s high data rate environment.
We set the LDPC code column weight to 4, the row weight to 36, and the size of the check and variable submatrix to 512. In this scenario, the total codeword length is 4608, the code rate is 0.889, and we set the original codeword length N of the shorter systematic polar code to 8192 (=213), the original code rate R to 0.9375, and the abbreviated length K to 3584.
We evaluate decoding performance and latency between LDPC and the shorter systematic polar codes using two distinct decoding algorithms with varying RBERs, shown in Fig. 7. It is simple to observe that the polar codes have stable performance due to its fixed decoding algorithm and will only fluctuate slightly within a fixed value range. In contrast, the LDPC iterative structure causes the average number of iterations to increase as the RBER increases, and the higher the RBER, the higher the decoding latency. Furthermore, the FastSCL algorithm outperforms the CA-SCL algorithm in terms of decoding latency.
Regarding error correction ability, Fig. 7(b), (c), (e), and (f) demonstrate that both LDPC and polar codes can fully correct errors at low RBER. When the RBER is increased gradually, the LDPC code is in the waterfall region and performs better than polar code in the area for error correction; however, as the RBER is increased further, the polar codes perform better for error correction than the LDPC code over

time. The choice between the two methods is essentially a tradeoff between error correction capabilities and decoding performance because the CA-SCL decoding algorithm performs better for error correction under the same list size than the Fast-SCL method.
The intersection points show that LDPC and polar codes have comparable decoding capability at those RBERs. The fixed list length polar code decoding capability curve always lies below the LDPC curve after the intersection point because the LDPC curve’s rate of change is far steeper than that of any list parameter in polar codes. Since we use LDPC as the standard for decoding ability, we consider the BER to be within an acceptable range if the decoding ability of polar codes ever exceeds the LDPC code. Following the crossover point, it suggests that polar codes with the current list length are now more capable of decoding than the LDPC code. At this point, reducing the list length can still result in a satisfactory decoding performance, even with a minor drop in decoding capability, while also lowering decoding delay.
According to [9], the number of vertical layers in 3-D NAND flash memory rises. This causes the number of pages in the flash block to increase, and because of the characteristics of the fabrication process, these pages have different physical properties. Moreover, a flash block as a whole will be labeled as a faulty block and will no longer be used when any one of its pages can no longer ensure the reliability. Unfortunately, not every page in the block has reached its maximum utilization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3552

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 8. Workflow of the proposed RaPC scheme.

at this point. As a result, there is a gap in the reliability and longevity of the various pages in the block, and this will be an issue because the page with the lowest endurance will determine the block’s maximum lifespan. In addition, RBER changes with the retention time and P/E cycles, so it is necessary to dynamically adjust the error correction ability of ECC according to the change of RBER to ensure the reliability and improve the decoding performance.
The simulation results show that, under some RBERs, the polar codes implement better in terms of error correction performance and decoding latency. However, it is inappropriate to use a single list-length SCL algorithm in all scenarios when considering the surroundings of 3-D NAND flash memory, where the RBER varies with the retention time, the number of PE cycles, and also varies from layer to layer. As a result, we propose a RBER-aware polar coding scheme for improving decoding performance while ensuing data reliability.
IV. PROPOSED RAPC SCHEME
The simulation results show that, if we use LDPC codes as a benchmark, employing polar codes with the CA-SCL and Fast-SCL algorithms with a fixed 32-list length can surpass decoding performance of LDPC codes throughout a wider range of RBER. Nevertheless, there is a noticeable increase in both overhead and decoding latency. A fixed list length of 32 necessitates dynamically storing 32 pathways with the shortest PM in the cache, which is far more costly than LDPC codes.
Additionally, overuse of resources at both lower and higher RBERs is evident for the polar code decoding with a fixed list length of 32, indicating overcapacity. The structural difference between decoding algorithms with varying list sizes, according to the corresponding decoding algorithms, is just the list parameter adjustment, which relates to the maximum number of possible decoding paths that can be retained. And the amount of storage space needs to be reserved. This

increases the viability of code reuse and further hardware implementation.
Fig. 8 shows the RaPC workflow. The decoding approach is the primary modification in the proposed scheme, as indicated by the flowchart. As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the data stored in flash memory is represented as a dispersion of threshold voltages. We mimic the interference found in real 3-D NAND flash memory using the channel model from [26]. P/E cycles and retention time are two important variables that have a big impact on the flash memory channel and are the subject of this model. The data is sent to the decoding end, where it can be thought of as a distribution of threshold voltages. LLR information is produced by a nonuniform perception algorithm. At this stage, RaPC begins to operate. First, based on the necessary ECC capabilities, such as whether a higher decoding capability or a faster decoding latency is required, we choose a suitable decoding algorithm beforehand, either RaPC with CA-SCL or RaPC with Fast-SCL. We use the RBER to dynamically modify the RaPC decoding algorithm’s list parameter during decoding.
As mentioned above, the polar code with the SCL decoding algorithm’s error correction capability is improved under the same circumstances by raising the list parameter. Consequently, a greater list value can still provide full decoding, but a lower list-based decoding algorithm may no longer be able to decode correctly when the RBER rises. Therefore, changing the list selection is meant to guarantee that the existing RaPC can still successfully decode data. The switching point in this phase is the error threshold at which the lower list fails to fully decode, and the list parameter will progressively increase from a lower value. It is important to note that we have set the list parameter’s upper limit to 32. This is due to the fact that decoding capability is not much improved by raising the top limit to 64 or higher. Nevertheless, the space overhead doubles as a result of the candidate paths doubling, which results in an expense that is not considered

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TU et al.: RaPC: RBER AWARE POLAR CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3553

(a)

(b)

Fig. 9. Variations of different list lengths depending on the RBER with CA-SCL decoding (a) and with Fast-SCL decoding (b).

Algorithm 1 RaPC Encoding

Algorithm 2 RaPC Decoding

Input: N (N = 2n, n > 0): The codeword length.

R (0 < R < 1): The code rate.

codeword:u = {u1, u2, . . . , uN}

K : Bits to shorten

Output:

N − K : The codeword length.

R : The code rate.

if N = 2 then

y1 ← u1 ⊕ u2 y2 ← u2 return {y1, y2}
else

{s1, s3, . . . , sN−1} ← {u1, . . . , uN−1} ⊕ {u2, . . . , uN } {s2, s4, . . . , sN } ← {u2, u4, . . . , uN } {v1, . . . , vN} ←Bit-reverse Order Operation: N(s) {y1, . . . , yN/2} ← EncodeProcess({v1, . . . , vN/2}) {yN/2+1, . . . , yN } ← EncodeProcess({vN/2+1, . . . , vN })

return y

end if

K ← round(N · R)

Set the final K bits in K to 0 and remove them

R

←

K−K N−K

justified. The full decoding limits for RaPC with CA-SCL and RaPC with Fast-SCL, with thresholds of 7.2 × 10−3 for RaPC with CA-SCL and 6.5 × 10−3 for RaPC with Fast-SCL, therefore arise at this crucial point for this section when the list parameter upper limit is set to 32. Algorithms 1 and 2 describe the RaPC encoding and decoding process.
It is evident from Fig. 7 that the curves’ rates of change for LDPC and polar codes differ. The decoding capability curves of polar codes at various list lengths intersect at spots where LDPC’s rate of change is noticeably higher. These points of intersection show that both algorithms’ decoding abilities are equal at the appropriate RBER. The decoding ability of polar codes at the current list length is still stronger than that of

Input:

N − K : The codeword length.

R (0 < R < 1): The code rate.

codeword:u = {u1, u2, . . . , uN−K }

Output:

still

error N

bits

:

The

Bit

Error

Rate.

still error frame total frame

:

The

Frame

Error

Rate.

Decoding Latency.

u ← padding zeros({u1, u2, . . . , uN−K }).

LLRs ← formulas (2) and (3).

RBER

←

error bits N

.

if Latency performance first then

Fast-SCL decoding algorithm

else

CA-SCL decoding algorithm

end if

switch RBER

case RBER changes:

Execute the Fast-SCL decoding algorithm, list size changes.

break

LDPC because of its larger rate of change after the intersection point, even while the RBER keeps rising. We consider the RBER to be within an acceptable range if the polar code’s decoding performance above that of LDPC. The intersection shows that the decoding capabilities of a list length of 2n−1 is adequate for the decoding process when the RBER climbs to the curves’ junction point, providing the list parameter prior to the intersection is 2n. We can now decrease the length of the current list to a lower level. Therefore, we can get lower decoding latency by marginally decreasing the decoding capabilities while still being within an acceptable range.
Accordingly, we can obtain the switching graphs of the list lengths for the two RaPC methods as the RBER varies based on the aforementioned list switching steps, as shown in Fig. 9. Specifically, we will examine the three intervals’ key points for list switching. When the RBER is less than 1 × 10−3, the SC algorithm is enough for error correction for the RaPC with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3554

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

CA-SCL algorithm in the first interval. The list length must be extended when the RBER rises. The simulation results show that the complete error correction thresholds for list length of 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 and 32 of the decoding algorithm are 1 × 10−3, 2.4 × 10−3, 3.9 × 10−3, 4.8 × 10−3, 6 × 10−3, and 7.2 × 10−3.
RaPC with CA-SCL is unable to accomplish total error correction, even with a list length of 32, but the LDPC code retains complete error correction when the RBER enters the second interval, that is, larger than 7.2×10−3. The intersection points in the decoding capability graph show that polar codes eventually outperform the LDPC code when the RBER hits the third interval. At RBERs of 1.15 × 10−2, 1.26 × 10−2, and 1.48×10−2, these crossing locations are found. The list length decreases from 32 to 16, then to 8, and ultimately to 4. We get the matching nodes by applying the same analysis method for the RaPC with the Fast-SCL algorithm. The RBERs of 8.5×10−5, 1.7×10−3, 2.5×10−3, 3.9×10−3, 5.0×10−3, and 6.5 × 10−3 correspond to the first interval. The duration of the second interval is 1.09 × 10−2. The third interval’s junction points are located at 1.17×10−2, 1.29×10−2, and 1.49×10−2. The performance investigation also demonstrates that RaPC with CA-SCL performs better than RaPC with Fast-SCL.
Higher list parameters improve decoding performance, but they also result in higher decoding latency. Consequently, we consider these factors in the design of RaPC. We do not only pick the list parameter that offers superior decoding performance once the RaPC approach can surpass LDPC in this regard. Rather, the crossover point serves as the benchmark for switching efficiency. We immediately drop the list parameter to reduce decoding latency when the RaPC performance outperforms the LDPC with a smaller list parameter.
RaPC is especially well-suited to the properties of 3-D NAND flash memory since it modifies the list size in response to changes in RBER. Different list sizes provide diverse error correcting capabilities, as illustrated in Section III’s Fig. 6. A higher list size typically translates into a stronger error correcting capability for the same decoding process. This dynamic adjustment guarantees that ECC may continue to maintain an acceptable error rate even while the RBER of specific pages progressively rises. Nevertheless, increasing the list size without taking into account a decrease is not always the most effective course of action because it also results in increased storage overhead and decoding latency. Therefore, in order to achieve lower space overhead, lower decoding latency, and faster throughput and bandwidth, we also minimize the list size within reasonable bounds.
V. EVALUATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This section evaluates the effectiveness of RaPC via computer simulations.
A. Evaluation Methodology
The quantitative evaluation of the RaPC scheme includes the following four aspects: BER, FER, latency, and space overhead. Additionally, we introduce LDPC and polar codes with the fixed list length as baseline comparisons, utilizing

the commonly used fixed-length list-16 traditional CA-SCL decoding algorithm and the fixed-length list-16 Fast-SCL decoding algorithm. To ensure fairness, all simulations are conducted on the same platform using MATLAB, with the server’s load maintained below full capacity to guarantee consistent decoding latency data.
Once the simulation platform and environment are fully standardized, the data settings must also be consistent. For the LDPC code, we set the parameters to a column weight of 4, a row weight of 36, and a check and variable submatrix size of 512. Hence, for user data generation, we randomly generate a 4096-bit binary string, which, after encoding, produces 512 parity bits. The total codeword length is 4608 bits, with a code rate of 0.889, and this data is used as the input for either the MSB or LSB of the 3-D NAND flash channel. A 7680-bit binary string is generated randomly, which is encoded into a total length of 8192 bits with a code rate of 0.9375. After using systematic polar encoding, the code is shortened, ensuring that the final length remains 4608 bits, with a code rate of 0.889. This data is also used as the input for the MSB or LSB of the flash memory channel.
There are four primary components to the RaPC evaluation method. The information bits are created first. A matching binary data string of the requisite length is generated at random based on the needed length of the information bits. After entering the encoder, this string is converted to a binary data string by encoding it using a systematic polar code. Following encoding, the string is shortened to fit the nonpower-of-two page size of flash memory. The binary data string is then mapped to a threshold voltage distribution in the channel noise addition procedure. The matching LLR information is acquired as the decoding input through a nonuniform perception mechanism. Finally, the fundamental decoding algorithm is used. The decoding performance is evaluated by counting BER, FER, and decoding latency. The algorithm is initially chosen depending on the needs of the user, regardless of whether they choose high decoding capability or low decoding latency. The list parameter is then dynamically changed according to the RBER range. In order to assess RaPC’s capabilities, the decoding results are compared to the original information bits and pertinent metrics are calculated. The procedures for creating the information bits and introducing noise into the channel are same for LDPC and RaPC. The column and row of the check matrix are transformed for encoding, and the normalized min-sum algorithm is used for decoding [10], [11].
During decoding, the BER, FER, and latency for each method are counted as evaluation metrics.
The statistical methods for evaluating the decoding performance are as follows.
1) Decoding Latency: Assume the decoding latency result for the ith frame is ti. After performing n rounds of simulation, we can compute the average decoding latency of the scheme at the current RBER by using formula

Tavg =

n i=1

ti

.

n

(13)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TU et al.: RaPC: RBER AWARE POLAR CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3555

Fig. 10. Variations of BER (a), FER (b), and decoding latency (c) under different RBERs. We use CPC to represent the conventional polar codes.

2) BER: Assume that the current information bit length is K, and the input information bit sequence is u1, . . ., uK. After decoding, the corresponding output information bit sequence is y1, . . ., yK. The number of bit errors in this frame is denoted as ENumi

ENumi = diff({u1, . . . uK}, {y1, . . . , yK}) (14)

where the diff function is a vector operation that compares two vectors of equal length and counts the number of positions where the bits differ. Similarly, after performing n rounds of testing, we can compute the

average BER for the current scheme at this RBER by using formula

BERavg =

n i=1

ENumi

.

n·K

(15)

3) FER: Each round of testing is considered one frame. If the frame is successfully decoded, it is counted as a

successful decoding; otherwise, it is counted as a failed decoding. The frame error for the ith frame is denoted as FENumi

FRNumi =

1, if ENumi > 0 0, if ENumi = 0.

(16)

Further, we can compute the average FER for the current

scheme at this RBER by utilizing formula

FERavg =

n i=1

FENumi

.

n

(17)

B. Decoding Performance Evaluation and Analysis
We investigate RBERs ranging from 0 to 0.015, as this range is critical for ECC performance. Beyond this range, 3-D NAND flash may employ alternative mechanisms, such as refreshing, to manage data errors, or mark blocks as bad blocks if data integrity can no longer be guaranteed. Additionally, beyond this RBER range, low-precision LLR values struggle to complete the error correction task, rendering the results invalid.
Fig. 10. primarily illustrates the decoding performance and decoding latency of LDPC codes, conventional fixed-length polar codes, and the proposed RaPC scheme as the RBER

dynamically varies. First, as observed from Fig. 10(a) and (b), the decoding capability of all schemes improves as the RBER increases, a trend is consistent with the typical behavior of ECC decoding capabilities. We note that the performance of the RaPC scheme is characterized by several sharp turns, corresponding to sudden performance changes. When comparing the curves of LDPC codes and conventional polar codes, we can see that RaPC intersects with these two schemes at several points. This indicates that the RaPC scheme has certain advantageous regions in terms of decoding capability compared to the conventional schemes, suggesting specific scenarios where it may be more applicable.
Next, examining Fig. 10(c), which depicts the overall trend of RaPC decoding latency, we observe that RaPC also exhibits several points of sudden performance change. However, in comparison to the decoding latency curve of LDPC codes, RaPC consistently demonstrates lower decoding latency than LDPC.
We then proceed to analyze the specific data in further detail. FER performance is depicted in Fig. 10(b), while BER performance is shown in Fig. 10(a). All data can be correctly decoded by both RaPC and the LDPC code when the RBER is less than about 7×10−3. As a result, the error correction point at which RaPC starts to fail is where the performance curves begin. RaPC’s error correction performance initially lags behind the LDPC code because of the LDPC code waterfall region’s greater performance. However, as the RBER rises, as Figs. 10(a) and (b) demonstrate, RaPC decoding performance eventually outperforms the LDPC code. When the RBER surpasses 1.01 × 10−2, RaPC with CA-SCL continuously performs better than LDPC decoding if the FER is used as the performance reference. In the meantime, when the RBER is greater than 1.045 × 10−2, RaPC with Fast-SCL stabilizes and outperforms the LDPC decoding performance. However, when utilizing the BER as the benchmark for performance, RaPC with CA-SCL continuously beats LDPC decoding when the RBER rises beyond 9.55 × 10−3, whilst RaPC with Fast-SCL scheme only does so when the RBER rises above 1.045×10−2.
We analyze the underlying reasons for this phenomenon as follows. First, the use of system polar codes as the founda-
tion for encoding and decoding significantly improves BER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3556

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 11. Variations of normalized BER (a), normalized FER (b), and normalized decoding latency (c) under different RBER ranges.

performance. Therefore, when BER is used as the performance reference metric, the advantage of RaPC over the LDPC code becomes more pronounced.
Furthermore, when comparing with conventional polar codes, it is evident that during the process of switching list sizes as the RBER changes, RaPC outperforms conventional polar codes when the RBER is below 1.097 × 10−2, but falls behind when the RBER exceeds 1.174 × 10−2. This makes sense because differences in the RaPC’s performance are directly related to adjustments made to the length of the list that the decoding algorithm uses. Naturally, RaPC outperforms traditional polar codes when it adopts a higher list length at low error rates. However, when the BBER falls within the range of 1.097 × 10−2 to 1.174 × 10−2, the list size matches that of the conventional polar code scheme, leading to overlap in performance.
If we only consider RaPC with CA-SCL and RaPC with Fast-SCL, as indicated in Fig. 10(c), we can clearly see that RaPC with Fast-SCL has a lower total decoding latency than RaPC with CA-SCL. This is because, as discussed in Section III, RaPC with Fast-SCL greatly reduces decoding latency by acquiring LLR information fast when special nodes, such Rate-1 and Rate-0 nodes, are encountered during the decoding process. While the performance of LDPC codes is generally steady, the recursive structure of LDPC codes results

in increased latency when compared to the decoding latency. As a result, LDPC decoding latency is higher than RaPC’s throughout all RBER levels.
Furthermore, there is an intersecting point between RaPC and the conventional polar code decoding latencies. This corresponds to the scenario in which RaPC’s list length changes to match the conventional polar code’s fixed list length, producing similar decoding latencies. Because of the decoding structure of the polar code’s exceptional stability, the decoding latency of RaPC fluctuates slightly, but not significantly, within a limited range of RBER. RaPC thus retains a degree of localized stability in terms of decoding delay when used as the ECC algorithm in 3-D NAND flash memory, provided that there are no abrupt changes in the RBER over a brief period of time.
When compared to LDPC, we select a range of RBER where there are not much differences in RaPC performance. We determine the average BER, FER, and decoding latency values for both LDPC and RaPC within this range. We then provide a more standardized and understandable comparison to emphasize RaPC’s error correction capability and decoding latency advantages over LDPC.
As illustrated in Fig. 11(a) and (b), both LDPC and RaPC can decode correctly in the low RBER region that is not visible prior to the first interval. RaPC’s performance first becomes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TU et al.: RaPC: RBER AWARE POLAR CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3557

Fig. 12. Comparisons of flash system bandwidth between LDPC and RaPC with RBERs of 2.2 × 10−3 (a), 8.6 × 10−3 (b), and 1.5 × 10−2 (c) under different traces.

excellent before beginning to deteriorate. This occurs because the decoding performance curves for RaPC and LDPC do not show a linear connection with RBER once a specific threshold is reached. The slopes of both curves decrease with increasing RBERs, reducing the performance difference between RaPC and LDPC.
Further investigation reveals that RaPC with CA-SCL offers an average decoding capacity around six times that of LDPC, with superior performance in the RBER range of 1.1 × 10−2 to 1.2 × 10−2. The decoding capability of RaPC with FastSCL is only roughly 4.5 times that of LDPC, despite the fact that it likewise performs exceptionally well in this region. This is because its main algorithm has the ability to decode. As will be shown more clearly in Fig. 11(c), the RaPC with FastSCL algorithm improves decoding latency performance at the expense of some decoding capability. The RaPC technique performs extraordinarily well at very low RBERs (about below 1 × 10−3), as seen by the normalized decoding latency performance in Fig. 11(c). RaPC can significantly reduce decoding latency when Fast-SCL is employed. This is due to the fact that both RaPC with CA-SCL and RaPC with Fast-SCL can fully decode with low list parameters at low RBERs, which results in better decoding latency performance. The data’s breadth is constrained, though. In the RBER range between 6.0 × 10−3 and 1.2 × 10−2, which is also the range where RaPC performs best in terms of decoding, the decoding latency of RaPC with CA-SCL is still roughly 0.2 times that of LDPC. Moreover, RaPC with Fast-SCL maintains even lower latency, roughly 0.1 times that of LDPC. RaPC outperforms the fixed list parameter polar code schemes in terms of decoding latency performance at higher RBERs as the list parameters are decreased.
C. Flash System Performance Evaluation and Analysis
We examine the variation of the bandwidth and assess how RaPC affects flash system performance On the FEMU platform, a software platform designed to mimic the behavior of flash storage device [34], we perform system-level simulations. Many facets of flash memory technology are being researched, developed, and tested using FEMU. According to [35], the

TABLE I SPECIFIC SYSTEM SIMULATION PARAMETERS
data transfer latency is set as (20 + 2 × 10) μs, and the sensing latency is set as (50 + 2 × 14) μs. We calculate the average latency for transmission of data and sensing, which is (3/2)((50 + 2 × 14) + (20 + 2 × 10)) μs. The LDPC decoding latency per iteration is between 0.2 and 2 μs, as stated in [36]. The LDPC decoding latency per iteration is set to 1μs. Table I gives the specific parameters.
Three RBER points (2.2×10−3, 8.6×10−3, and 1.5 × 10−2) are utilized to assess the bandwidth under commonly used traces (rsrch2, src2_1, stg_1, user_0, web_1, web_2, hm_1, and WebSearch1). Fig. 12 demonstrates the normalized bandwidth of LDPC, RaPC with CA-SCL, and RaPC with Fast-SCL under three sample RBERs.
Fig. 12 shows the flash system bandwidth comparison at RBERs of 2.2×10−3, 8.6×10−3, and 1.5×10−2 using LDPC, RaPC with CA-SCL, and RaPC with Fast-SCL. We normalize the system bandwidth using the LDPC algorithm to 1.
It is evident from Fig. 12 that RaPC performs superior to LDPC in terms of overall system bandwidth, with RaPC with Fast-SCL demonstrating a noticeable advantage. This is due to the fact that lower decoding latency lowers overall read latency, which enhances the flash memory system’s bandwidth. Additionally, a comparison shows that at an RBER of 1.5 × 10−2, the bandwidth benefit of RaPC is especially noteworthy. This is because LDPC necessitates more iterations at higher RBERs, which raises the decoding latency. By deliberately lowering the list parameter, RaPC, on the other hand, trades some decoding capacity for improved decoding latency performance, which is reflected in the increased system bandwidth. The bandwidth comparison at an RBER of 8.6 × 10−3 demonstrates a wider benefit across different RBERs. A 25% improvement is observed in a number of traces, with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3558

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 44, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

the highest showing up to 40% improvement. RaPC’s superior decoding latency performance is responsible for this increase.
D. Space Overhead Analysis
The SCL method keeps the L pathways with the highest PM values among all the extended paths, expanding paths to both 0 and 1 at each stage. This improves error correcting capacity by increasing the number of candidate paths retained during decoding and selecting the correct path through CRC checking after decoding is finished. Nevertheless, this method necessitates the dynamic retention of L decoding pathways throughout the procedure. According to the settings selected in this work, the LLRs need to be restored to 8192 bits prior to decoding, even though the shortening process is applied prior to the flash memory channel transmission; otherwise, the decoding phase cannot begin. The LLR values have at most 10 possible values, which can be stored using 4 bits. The overhead of real-time space is 8192 × 4 bits, or 4 KB. The space overhead rises as the list parameters change dynamically. It may reach 64KB if the list option is set to 16. Additionally, the code length of the RaPC algorithm is fixed, meaning that the space overhead is determined by the dynamically changed list parameter. RaPC can achieve lower space overhead and decoding latency, which also results in higher throughput and bandwidth, by properly altering the list parameter at the right time, but at the expense of a minor reduction in decoding capabilities.
E. Discussion
Both 3-D TLC and 3-D QLC NAND flash memory can be applied with the proposed RaPC method. From an ECC standpoint, the acquisition of LLRs is the independent change required for TLC and QLC types in comparison to the MLC type covered in our study. The RaPC approach still works with TLC-type 3-D NAND flash, which will likewise see notable interlayer variations. The decoding input stays the same by dynamically updating the list parameter, altering the LLR calculation procedure, and sensing the RBER of the TLC-type 3-D NAND flash memory. LLR information is still sent to the RaPC decoder, which decodes the correct result in the same way. The distinction is that separate modeling for various kinds of flash memory chips is needed for simulating the dynamic switching of the list parameter at the RBER point. We can also deduce that our method is universally applicable because the same concept applies to QLC flash.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article attempts to improve data reliability by exploring an alternative ECC scheme that is customized to the properties of 3-D NAND flash memory. In order to present the proposed RaPC coding scheme, we try to integrate the characteristics of 3-D NAND flash memory with the features of the polar code decoding algorithm. We thoroughly evaluate RaPC with the conventional LDPC scheme in terms of error correction performance, decoding latency, and overhead. Our focus is on theoretical analysis and simulated data testing. Based on the experimental findings, it can be said that, for the same

code length and code rate, RaPC performs typically better in
terms of decoding delay than LDPC codes. RaPC routinely
outperforms the LDPC scheme in terms of decoding ability
within a particular range of RBERs, that is, when the RBER is greater than 1×10−2. RaPC can effectively improves decoding
performance while ensuing data reliability.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Sako et al., “A low power 64 GB MLC NAND-flash memory in 15 nm CMOS technology,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 196–203, Jan. 2016.
[2] H. Kim, S.-J. Ahn, Y. G. Shin, K. Lee, and E. Jung, “Evolution of NAND flash memory: From 2D to 3D as a storage market leader,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[3] A. Goda, “3-D NAND technology achievements and future scaling perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1373–1381, Apr. 2020.
[4] L. Heineck and J. Liu, “3D NAND flash status and trends,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2022, pp. 1–4.
[5] J. Yuh et al., “A 1-tb 4b/cell 4-plane 162-layer 3D flash memory with a 2.4-Gb/s I/O speed interface,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), vol. 65, 2022, pp. 130–132.
[6] Y. Aiba et al., “Cryogenic operation of 3D flash memory for new applications and bit cost scaling with 6-bit per cell (HLC) and beyond,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Electron Devices Technol. Manuf. Conf. (EDTM), 2021, pp. 1–3.
[7] H. Tanaka et al., “Toward 7 bits per cell: Synergistic improvement of 3D flash memory by combination of single-crystal channel and cryogenic operation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2022, pp. 1–4.
[8] G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010.
[9] M. Raquibuzzaman, M. M. Hasan, A. Milenkovic, and B. Ray, “Layerto-layer endurance variation of 3D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), 2022, pp. 1–5.
[10] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol., 2013, pp. 243–256.
[11] M. Zhang et al., “BeLDPC: Bit errors aware adaptive rate LDPC codes for 3D TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2020, pp. 302–305.
[12] P. Rao, P. Babshet, R. Arun Babu, and M. S. Sunita, “Encoder and adaptive decoder for a (15,6,2) DEC-TED BCH code,” in Proc. IEEE 17th India Council Int. Conf. (INDICON), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[13] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Aug. 1996.
[14] H. Song, C. Zhang, S. Zhang, and X. You, “Polar code-based error correction code scheme for NAND flash memory applications,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. (WCSP), 2016, pp. 1–5.
[15] D. P. Nguyen, K. Le, F. Ghaffari, and D. Declercq, “Performance enhancement of polar codes in multi-level cell NAND flash memories using systematic encoding,” in Proc. 19th Int. Symp. Commun. Inf. Technol. (ISCIT), 2019, pp. 621–626.
[16] J. Peng, Q. Wang, X. Fu, and Z. Huo, “Dynamic LLR scheme based on EM algorithm for LDPC decoding in NAND flash memory,” IEICE Electron. Exp., vol. 14, no. 18, 2017, Art. no. 20170820.
[17] T.-H. Chen, Y.-Y. Hsiao, Y.-T. Hsing, and C.-W. Wu, “An adaptive-rate error correction scheme for NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 27th IEEE VLSI Test Symp., 2009, pp. 53–58.
[18] F. Wu et al., “Characterizing 3D charge trap NAND flash: Observations, analyses and applications,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2018, pp. 381–388.
[19] A. Alsalibi, S. Mittal, M. Al-Betar, and S. Putra, “A survey of techniques for architecting SLC/MLC/TLC hybrid flash memory–based SSDs,” Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp., vol. 30, no. 13, Jan. 2018, Art. no. e4420.
[20] A. Goda, “Recent progress on 3D NAND flash technologies,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 24, p. 3156, 2021.
[21] Y. Suh, H. Kyung, Y. Jung, and D. Kang, “A novel structure between WL spaces to improve the retention characteristics in 3D NAND flash,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 15050–15055, 2024.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TU et al.: RaPC: RBER AWARE POLAR CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

3559

[22] C. Monzio Compagnoni and A. S. Spinelli, “Reliability of NAND flash arrays: A review of what the 2-D–to–3-D transition meant,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 4504–4516, Nov. 2019.
[23] Y. Cai, O. Mutlu, E. F. Haratsch, and K. Mai, “Program interference in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, modeling, and mitigation,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2013, pp. 123–130.
[24] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, and O. Mutlu, “Read disturb errors in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery,” in Proc. 45th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., 2015, pp. 438–449.
[25] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, E. F. Haratsch, K. Mai, and O. Mutlu, “Data retention in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, optimization, and recovery,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), 2015, pp. 551–563.
[26] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “Improving 3D NAND flash memory lifetime by tolerating early retention loss and process variation,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Meas. Model. Comput. Syst., 2018, p. 106.
[27] E. Arikan, “Channel combining and splitting for cutoff rate improvement,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2005, pp. 671–675.
[28] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[29] K. Niu and K. Chen, “CRC-aided decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1668–1671, Oct. 2012.
[30] S. Belhadj and M. L. Abdelmounaim, “On error correction performance of LDPC and polar codes for the 5G machine type communications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. IOT, Electron. Mechatronics Conf. (IEMTRONICS), 2021, pp. 1–4.
[31] E. Arikan, “Systematic polar coding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 860–862, Aug. 2011.
[32] V. Bioglio, F. Gabry, and I. Land, “Low-complexity puncturing and shortening of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. Workshops (WCNCW), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[33] S. A. Hashemi, C. Condo, and W. J. Gross, “Fast and flexible successivecancellation list decoders for polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 65, no. 21, pp. 5756–5769, Nov. 2017.
[34] H. Li, M. Hao, M. H. Tong, S. Sundararaman, M. Bjørling, and H. S. Gunawi, “The CASE of FEMU: Cheap, accurate, scalable and extensible flash emulator,” in Proc. 16th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2018, pp. 83–90.
[35] Y. Du, D. Zou, Q. Li, L. Shi, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “LalDPC: Latency-aware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. MSST, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[36] R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Chuang, C.-L. Yang, C.-H. Li, K.-C. Ho, and H.-P. Li, “Improving read performance of NAND flash SSDs by exploiting error locality,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1090–1102, Apr. 2016.

Meng Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 2019.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, HUST. His current research interests include nonvolatile memory, dynamic random access memory, optical storage, and error correction codes.
Changsheng Xie (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer science and technology from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 1982 and 1988, respectively.
He served as the Deputy Director of the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, HUST, where he is currently a Professor. His research interests include new storage technology and architecture, multimedia computing and network, computer storage, and network storage and security. Prof. Xie served as the Deputy Director of Computer Peripheral Equipment Committee of China Computer Federation, the Committee Member of Information Storage of China Computer Society, and the Vice Chairman of the China Expert Committee of the International Network Storage Industry Association.

Ruifeng Tu is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
His main research interests include flash memory, flash memory reliability, and error correction codes.

Fei Wu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical automation from the Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, in 2005.
She is currently a Professor with the Information Storage Lab, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, HUST. Her research interests include computer architecture, nonvolatile memory, embedded systems, and intelligent storage.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

