IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2025

717

Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes With an Add-On Structure for Reliable Communications
Hyejin Ro, Junghyun Kim , Hosung Park , Member, IEEE, Sang-Hyo Kim , Member, IEEE, Seok-Ki Ahn , Member, IEEE, and Sung-Ik Park , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The 5G multicast and broadcast service (MBS) has been discussed since 3GPP Release 17, emphasizing resourceefficient transmission for multiple users. A primary focus of 5G MBS is enhancing reliability, even for the broadcast mode without retransmissions. In discussing 6G, the hyper reliable communication is also an important use case. In this context, the design of channel codes with low error floors is crucial to ensure robust communication for such demanding scenarios. Protograph-based raptor-like (PBRL) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have good error-correcting performance and ratecompatibility but the construction has focused on waterfall rather than error floor. In this paper, we propose an add-on structure for PBRL LDPC codes to have low error floors, which consists of edges added on the protographs of original PBRL LDPC codes. The added edges play a role of boosting up the reliability of weak variable nodes in the original PBRL LDPC codes. We propose two construction algorithms, one for use at a fixed rate and the other for rate-compatible use. It is shown via simulations that the proposed codes have lower error floors than the original PBRL LDPC codes for various rates. Since the edge addition does not change the existing edge connections in the protograph, an adaptive use with/without the add-on structure has an effect of implementing two PBRL LDPC codes for high-speed and reliable communications in an efficient way while keeping the system backward-compatible with the original PBRL LDPC code.
Index Terms—Error floor, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, minimum distance, message-passing decoding, protographbased raptor-like (PBRL) codes, reliable communications.
Received 24 November 2024; revised 15 February 2025 and 28 April 2025; accepted 27 May 2025. Date of publication 12 June 2025; date of current version 8 September 2025. This work was supported in part by the Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) Grant funded by the Korea Government (MIST) through Channel Coding with Flexible Reliability for 6G/B5G xURLLC under Grant 2021001016004, and in part by the Innovative Human Resource Development for Local Intellectualization Support Program under Grant IITP-2024-RS2022-00156287, 30%. (Corresponding author: Hosung Park.)
Hyejin Ro was with the Department of ICT Convergence System Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, South Korea. She is now with the Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics, Seoul 06765, South Korea (e-mail: gpwlsehrehr@gmail.com).
Junghyun Kim is with the Department of Intelligent Electronics and Computer Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, South Korea (e-mail: jhkim5736@jnu.ac.kr).
Hosung Park is with the School of Electronics and Computer Engineering and the Department of Intelligent Electronics and Computer Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, South Korea (e-mail: hpark1@jnu.ac.kr).
Sang-Hyo Kim is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, South Korea (e-mail: iamshkim@skku.edu).
Seok-Ki Ahn and Sung-Ik Park are with the Media Research Division, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon 34129, South Korea (e-mail: seokki.ahn@etri.re.kr; psi76@etri.re.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2025.3575341

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] became dominating channel codes for high-speed communications owing to the excellent error-correcting performance and the inherent high parallelism in decoder implementation [2], [3], [4]. Most practical LDPC codes are constructed based on small bipartite graphs, called protogaphs [5], because they give a simple description of codes and enable hardware-friendly implementation. Especially, protographbased raptor-like (PBRL) LDPC codes [6] are well-suited for a rate-compatible feature to adapt the channel coding to channel states as well as having good density evolution (DE) thresholds. Owing to these advantages, PBRL LDPC codes are adopted in wireless communications such as ATSC 3.0 [7] and 5G new radio (NR) [8], [9], and also considered for DTMB-A [10].
The error-correcting performance of irregular LDPC codes are dominated by their asymptotic performance due to degree distributions. In terms of code design, we usually observe a tradeoff between waterfall and error floor performances among LDPC codes with good degree distributions [11], [12]. A PBRL LDPC code includes many degree-1 variable nodes in the protograph. When the message part is carefully designed to include high-degree variable nodes, the code can have good DE thresholds in the existence of the degree-1 variable nodes [13]. By taking this strategy in design, most existing PBRL LDPC codes have been developed to have a good threshold and equivalently good waterfall performance.
The importance of reliable communications is growing as many use cases are integrated in wireless communications. The 5G multicast and broadcast services (MBS) [14], [15], [16] were introduced in 3GPP Release 17 to improve over the existing broadcasting [17], [18] and have been developed over existing 5G framework to enhance 5G NR capabilities for serving reliable, low latency, resource efficient, and massively deployable multicast and broadcast services. In particular, the service QoS requirement is defined packet error rate 10−6 for mission-critical delay-sensitive signaling [16] and the reliability needs to be guaranteed under the broadcast mode which does not generally consider the hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ). Nonetheless, channel codes for reliable communications are not discussed much and the current PBRL LDPC codes adopted in 5G NR have a target block error rate (BLER) down to 10−5. Recently, hyper-reliable lowlatency communication (HRLLC) [19] is discussed for 6G and we need to consider much lower BLER than 10−5 down

1557-9611 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

718
TABLE I PRIMARY NOTATIONS USED IN THIS PAPER

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2025
of the original PBRL LDPC codes. We propose an algorithm to construct the add-on structure optimized for PBRL LDPC codes running on a fixed rate and develop it further for codes running on rate-compatible scenarios. Also, we propose a metric to derive criteria to determine where to add edges in protographs and use it to construct the add-on structures in the algorithm. It is shown that the resulting codes with a few edges added have lower error floors than the original PBRL LDPC codes for both the use for a fixed rate and the rate-compatible use.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the basic structure, the description, and the encoding of original PBRL LDPC codes and we define the related notations. The primary notations frequently used in this paper are summarized in Table I. In Section III, we define the addon structure and explain the encoding procedure of PBRL LDPC codes with the add-on structure. Also, we propose a construction algorithm for use at a fixed rate. In Section IV, we define a new metric to select proper locations of added edges and propose a construction algorithm for rate-compatible use. In Section V, it is shown for two instances of PBRL LDPC codes that the add-on structures lower the error floors of the original codes for both the fixed-rate use and the ratecompatible use. Finally, Section VI summarizes our work.

to 10−9 [20]. Achieving such level of reliability by the sole aid of channel coding may be challenging, but is still an important research topic as many future broadcasting and mobile communication services demand more reliability.
There have been some research works to construct PBRL LDPC codes targeting for reliable communications. In [21], the authors proposed a class of PBRL LDPC codes with short length and fast decoding convergence for ultra-reliable and low-latency communications in 5G. In the protographs, the connection degrees can be progressively optimized by the protograph-based extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) analysis. In [22], a design method was proposed to maximize an upper bound of the minimum distance of PBRL LDPC codes at short lengths for low BLER requirements. In [23], the authors proposed accumulate-repeat-accumulate-checkaccumulate (ARACA) codes as a subclass of protograph-based LDPC code. The ARACA codes have the superiority of BLER performance, especially at low-rates in an ultra-reliable regime. In [24], a degree reduction method was proposed to obtain exponent matrices for multiple-edge protographs so the resulting PBRL LDPC codes can have short lengths and girth at least 6.
In this paper, we propose a systematic method of adding a number of edges to any given protograph of waterfalloptimized irregular PBRL LDPC code to achieve low error floors. We make the edges in the “add-on structure” be connected to some degree-1 variable nodes properly selected from the given protograph and do not change the existing edge connections in the protograph. This property ensures that the implementation of the encoder/decoder with the add-on structure requires a simple addition of logics to the encoder/decoder

II. PBRL LDPC CODES
A protograph is a bipartite graph defined by a triple of sets
of variable nodes, check nodes, and edges, where an edge
is denoted by (c, v) connected to check node c and variable
node v. Protograph-based LDPC codes can be represented with
protographs and we provide an example for the protograph of
a PBRL LDPC code in Fig. 1 for ease of explanation. The
protograph P of a PBRL LDPC code consists of two parts.
The first part (shown on the left in Fig. 1) is the protograph
of a relatively simple precode which is called the highestrate code (HRC), denoted by P(HRC). The second part (shown
on the right in Fig. 1) is the protograph of a Luby transform
code [25] which is called the incremental redundancy code (IRC), denoted by P(IRC). Let V(1) and V(2) denote the set of
variable nodes in the HRC and the set of degree-1 variable nodes in the IRC, respectively, and let V = V(1) ∪ V(2). Let C(1) and C(2) denote the sets of check nodes in the HRC and the IRC, respectively, and let C = C(1) ∪ C(2). Let E(1), E(2), and E(3) denote the sets of edges between C(1) and V(1), between V(1) and C(2), and between C(2) and V(2), respectively, and let E = E(1) ∪ E(2) ∪ E(3). Then, we see P(HRC) = (V(1), C(1), E(1)), P(IRC) = (V(1), C(2), E(2)), and P = (V, C, E).
We define the extension part of PBRL LDPC codes as P(EXT) = (V(2), C(2), E(3)). It is noted that the nodes in C(2) are connected to the nodes in V(2) one by one in the natural order through the edges in E(3) to incrementally generate
parities for rate compatibility and we will propose an add-on
structure by modifying this part later. The rate of the HRC
becomes the upper limit on the rate of the rate-compatible
coding and the code rate is lowered as more degree-1 nodes
are transmitted. In the example of Fig. 1, the rate of the HRC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RO et al.: PBRL LDPC CODES WITH AN ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR RELIABLE COMMUNICATIONS

719

Fig. 1. Example for a protograph of PBRL LDPC code.

is 2/3 and thus the rate of the PBRL LDPC code takes a value
from 4/13 to 2/3 when any variable node in the HRC is not
punctured.
The protomatrix is defined as the incidence matrix of the
protograph and PBRL LDPC codes can be also represented with protomatrices. Let P(HRC) and P(IRC) denote the protomatrices of P(HRC) and P(IRC), respectively. The protomatrix of
a PBRL LDPC code is expressed as

P=

P(HRC) O P(IRC) I

,

(1)

where O is an all-zero matrix and I is an identity matrix. To be precise, the protomatrix of the IRC must be [P(IRC)|I] but the
connection of I is trivial so we simply use the notation in (1). Let P(EXT) denote the protomatrix of P(EXT) and it is initially
equal to I before the edge addition. To define the protograph of a PBRL LDPC code, it is enough to specify P(HRC) and P(IRC). In the example of Fig. 1, P(HRC) and P(IRC) are given
as

P(HRC) =

1 2

2 1

1 2

2 2

1 1

1 2

(2)

and

⎡

⎤

110100

P(IRC) = ⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢10100

0 1 0 0 0

1 0 0 1 0

0 0 1 0 0

0 0 1 0 0

01101⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥.

(3)

010110

Lifting is a process to obtain the Tanner graph of an individual LDPC code by applying the copy-and-permutation operation to a protograph. The lift size is defined as the number of times to copy the protograph and denoted by z. In the protomatrix representation, each element of a protomatrix is replaced with a z × z permutation matrix, a sum of z × z permutation matrices, or a z × z zero matrix to form the parity-check matrix. Based on the structure of the resulting parity-check matrix, a codeword vector c can be naturally

divided into z-bit subvectors and we will call each subvector a subblock.
In this paper, we consider only cyclic permutations for lifting and the resulting PBRL LDPC codes always become quasi-cyclic (QC) [26]. Each edge in the protograph becomes a z × z cyclic permutation matrix (CPM) after lifting. The i-th row of CPM is cyclically shifted to the right by one position from the (i−1)-th row. Let ◦ denote the circular shift operator and the i-th circular shift of a vector c is denoted by c◦i. The shift value of a CPM is equal to the column index of 1 in the first row. The shift value of zero matrix is represented as −∞. We define c◦(−∞) = 0.
Let λ, λ1, and λ2 denote the number of variable nodes in V, V(1), and V(2), respectively, and let ρ, ρ1, and ρ2 denote the number of check nodes in C, C(1), and C(2), respectively. That is, λ = |V|, λ1 = |V(1)|, λ2 = |V(2)|, ρ = |C|, ρ1 = |C(1)|, and ρ2 = |C(2)|. It is obvious that λ = λ1 + λ2, ρ = ρ1 + ρ2, and ρ2 = λ2. Accordingly, the sizes of protomatrices P(HRC), P(IRC), O, and I (or P(EXT)) become ρ1 × λ1, ρ2 × λ1, ρ1 × λ2, and ρ2 × λ2, respectively.
We will use lower case letters to denote each element in a set (matrix) and let the superscript of the notation of elements inherit the superscript of the set (matrix). The subscript will designate the order of each element. For example, V(1) = {v(11), v2(1), . . . , vλ(11)} and, similarly, the element located at the i-th row and the j-th column (we briefly call the (i, j)-th element) in P(IRC) is denoted by pi(,IjRC).
III. ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR PBRL LDPC CODES
A single PBRL LDPC code cannot be universally good for various target BLER points, i.e., a high target BLER for high-speed communications and a low target BLER for reliable communications from the perspective of the tradeoff between waterfall and error floor performances. So we need to implement two or more codes in a system to cover all target BLER points for various use cases but this can much increase the complexity of the system. In the scenario of our add-on structure, we assume that a main irregular PBRL LDPC code is constructed to have a good DE threshold as usually done and then the code is modified by adding a number of edges to have a low error floor. The PBRL LDPC code with the add-on structure can effectively cover various target BLER points by using or not using the add-on structure adaptively for a given target BLER.
A. Effect of Edge Addition
We propose to add a number of edges on the lower triangular part of the matrix I in (1), not allowing parallel edges. An added edge can be expressed as (c(i2), vj(2)) for i > j. The resulting code can preserve the advantages of the raptor-like structure. According to [6], the resulting PBRL LDPC code with a lower triangular matrix is equivalent to another PBRL LDPC code with the identity matrix I and thus adding the edges in the lower triangular part corresponds to designing another conventional PBRL LDPC code in terms of code equivalence. However, the expression with the PBRL LDPC code and the add-on structure is much simpler than the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2025

expression with the two different PBRL LDPC codes of the

original form so the memory to store the code parameters is

minimized and the encoder/decoder structures are kept almost same. Moreover, a direct change of P(HRC) and P(IRC) makes a

larger additional implementation cost in encoder/decoder than

a change to the extension part. So we can say that the add-

on structure we propose is an efficient way to implement two

different codes with a low complexity.

Now, we need to look into the effect of edge addition in

the lower triangular part to eventually determine where to add

edges for low error floors. PBRL LDPC codes are mostly

used for wireless communications so their degree distribution

is basically irregular. Irregular degree distributions are to

instigate the imbalance of reliability among variable nodes

and this leads to a good DE threshold and good waterfall

performance in a finite-length case. On the other hand, a

good error floor performance can be attained by diminishing

the imbalance and making the reliability of variable nodes

rather uniform. An extreme case in this direction will be

regular LDPC codes which are known to have low error

floors. We assume that a PBRL LDPC code is given, which

was designed to have good irregular degree distributions for

waterfall performance. Thus we aim to add edges in the lower

triangular part so that they can have a good influence on

relatively unreliable variable nodes in the HRC.

We explain the effect of the edge addition by the nature of

iterative decoding with an example. Fig. 2 shows the IRC part

of the example protograph in Fig. 1 and illustrates addition omn1tshtf,oree.desa.necsn.gha,tgcahe7i(ne2ed,n)ngseveeelfadnorvt(irmaaclfb7(eeur2lvos)eese,maravnygn5(o2vedd)(5i)c2ett.e)ahrvneIati(not2ami)ortcrenhsi5(sve.2esen)aAdoagisfsrtetievgisstr(3itse1nr)netachtnalhengfaprdtnohernomvdeet6(ngo1leec)gdv7(vr2aia)isalapusthoace,d(5a2vtdf)o(5ose2sud)rco.m,hiTtehtchho=akeeft the variable nodes become more reliable than the case of the

original protograph without the added edge. It is noted that

the be

other much

hsterlepnfgutlhienneindcmreeasssinaggethseenrtelfiraobmilivty(52)oftonocd7(2e)swinillVn(o1)t

because nodes in

the reliability of the messages V(1) are still dominated by the

cshenant nferol mvalcu7(e2)otfov7(t2h)e.

This edge addition will be effective for low error floors when

the variable nodes v(31) and v6(1) have high error rates.

The edge addition cannot directly modify the graph structure

of the existing trapping sets but can help to mitigate harmful

trapping sets by supplying strengthened messages to them

through the added edges. The proposed method is to add edges

in the extension part while all the trapping sets in PBRL LDPC codes of the original form locate in only P(HRC) ∪ P(IRC).

The strengthened message resulting from the edge addition propagates via a check node, e.g. c(52) in Fig. 2 and if an odd number of nodes among the reinforced variable nodes belong

to trapping sets, the check node becomes unsatisfied and sends

a correctly strengthened message to the variable nodes. On the

other hand, the edge addition rather makes additional cycles

which could be harmful in iterative decoding. To minimize

the negative effect, we need to select the locations to add

edges not to generate short cycles in the protograph and lift it

Fig. 2. Illustration of the IRC of the protograph example with an added edge.

with a well-designed algorithm such as the approximate cycle

extrinsic message degree (ACE).

The edge addition can increase the minimum distance

of PBRL LDPC codes. Since degree-1 variable nodes are

generally prone to a small minimum distance, the edge

addition might look like a good method to increase the

minimum distance. However, as explained before, the PBRL

LDPC code with the added edges are again equivalent to

a code of the original form so it is not true to say that

randomly adding edges to degree-1 variable nodes increases

the minimum distance of PBRL LDPC codes. Therefore, we

need to carefully add edges to increase the minimum distance.

If errors are due to a small minimum distance in the error

floor region, variable nodes in the HRC with high error rates

are likely to be involved with small distances. So it can be

a good strategy to add an edge to a degree-1 variable which

are connected with the high-error-rate variable nodes via a

check node. In the example high error rates, adding the

eodfgeFibge. t2w,eiefnvv3(1(5)2)aanndd/ocr7(2v)6(1c)ahnabvee

effective in terms of Hamming distance of the code as well as

from the aspect of iterative decoding.

B. Encoding With the Add-On Structure
We explain how to efficiently encode for PBRL LDPC codes with the add-on structure. Based on the rate-compatibility, we assume to take ρ < ρ2 rows from the IRC then P(IRC) has size ρ × λ1 and P(EXT) has size ρ × ρ . Let us consider encoding for a lifted code from the proposed protograph. So we need to specify the parameters after lifting. As mentioned in Section II, only cyclic permutations are considered. We do not consider parallel edges but the extension to the case of parallel edges is straightforward. Each edge in the IRC becomes a z × z CPM after lifting. Let zi,j denote the shift value of the CPM lifted from the (i, j)-th element of P(IRC) for i = 1, . . . , ρ and j = 1, . . . , λ1. It is noted that the shift values of the CPM

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RO et al.: PBRL LDPC CODES WITH AN ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR RELIABLE COMMUNICATIONS

721

lifted from the diagonal elements of I in (1) can be set as 0
without loss of generality.
The encoding of the original PBRL LDPC codes consists of two steps: HRC encoding and IRC parity generation. Let s = [s1|s2| · · · |sλ1 ] be the output of the HRC encoding, where si has length z. The parity bits for the extension part are denoted by binary row vector p = [p1|p2| · · · |pρ ]. Then, the encoding; the generation of p from s is

λ1

pi = sj◦zi,j , i = 1, . . . , ρ ,

(4)

j=1

where the summation is conducted over GF(2). It is worth to

note that we do not need to sequentially generate pi and a

parallel encoding is enabled.

The encoding of PBRL LDPC codes with the proposed

add-on structure is the same as that of the original PBRL

code except that a simple post processing step is added. This

encoding method can fully utilize the original encoder and

processes the additional step in low complexity. Let p be the

result of processing as in (4). Note that p is not the parity

vector because of the add-on part and addition processing is

needed to get p.

To generate the parity p, we need to find a path from a

degree-1 variable node to another degree-1 variable node only

inside the lower triangular part. Fig. 3 shows two examples to

explain the encoding with the add-on structure. In Fig. 3(a), we find three paths: v1(2) − c6(2), v(32) − c(72), v(52) − c7(2), and each path traverses only one added edge. In this case, p6 = (p1)◦z1 + p6, p7 = (p3)◦z2 + (p5)◦z3 + p7, and pi = pi for the other i, where z1, z2, and z3 represent the shift values

for the added edges. The additional encoding for p6 and p7

can be done at the same time. In Fig. 3(b), we find one path:

v2(2) − c(42) − v4(2) − added edges in the
(p4)◦z5 + p6, p7 =

c(62) − v(62) − c7(2) − v7(2) and

path. In (p6)◦z6

this case, + p7, and

p4 pi

= =

(p2 pi

there are three
)◦z4 + p4, p6 = for the other i,

where z4, z5, and z6 represent the shift values for the added

edges. The additional encoding for p4, p6, and p7 has to be

done in the sequential order.

We can generalize the additional encoding as follows.

1) Find all paths from a degree-1 variable node to another

degree-1 variable node only inside the low triangular

part and express each path in the increasing order of

node index.

2) Encode for pi in the increasing order of i. Let ni denote the number of added edges connected to c(i2) and let vij

denote the degree-1 variable node connected to the j-th

edge for j = 1, . . . , ni. Then, pi = pi +

ni j=1

pij

.

3) We can encode in parallel as long as the encoding order

in each path is kept.

The depth of computation that we have to go through to

encode all parity blocks depends on the dependency between

pis, which will determine the latency of the encoder with

maximum possible parallelism. In fact, the depth is equal to

the number of added edges in the maximum length path. In

this paper, we allow only one added edge in every path for

practical use and simple choice of edge addition. We also

assume that more than one edge can be added per variable

Fig. 3. Two examples for the encoding with the add-on structure.
node in the extension part but at most one edge is added per check node so that the added edges cannot generate any cycles inside the lower triangular part.
Alternatively, we can use the equivalent PBRL LDPC code of the original form and make use of full parallel encoding. However, this operation generally breaks the sparsity of P(IRC) and we need to store additional encoding equations. When a small number of edges are added, only a few parities will be generated by the dense encoding equations so the overall complexity will slightly increase.
C. Construction for Use at a Fixed Rate
We give some notations to clearly describe the construction algorithms. For c ∈ C(2), let Vc denote the set of the variable nodes in V(1) ∪ V(2) connected with c. For v ∈ V(1) ∪ V(2), let Cv denote the set of the check nodes in C(2) connected with v. For v ∈ V(2), let Cv(low) denote the set of the check nodes in C(2) whose index is larger than the index of v. If v = vi(2), we have Cv(low) = {ci(+2)1, ci(+2)2, . . . , c(ρ22)}. The meaning of Cv(low) becomes clear in the protomatrix representation and it corresponds to the rows below the 1 in the main diagonal for a given column of weight 1.
We need to introduce a metric to decide whether a variable node in the HRC is reliable or not and it will give criteria where to add edges. The bit error rate (BER) within a subblock will be called the subblock BER. For use at a fixed rate, we use, as a metric, the empirical subblock BER (ESBER) of a given original code for each variable node in the protograph, which is obtained from simulation at a SNR in the error floor region. It is noted that once the ESBERs are obtained, any simulation or optimization is not required for the code construction. Let

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2025

Algorithm 1 Construction of V(tgt) and V(sel)

Input: P(IRC), P(EXT), M

Output: V(sel) (ordered set), V(tgt)

1: V(tgt) ← ∅, V(sel) ← ∅

2: V(tmp) ← V(1)

3: 4:

while ( V (tgt)

v∈V (tgt)
← V(tgt)

mv < ∪ {v}

1
2
for

v∈V (1)
which

mv ) v←

do arg maxv

∈V (tmp)

mv

5: V(tmp) ← V(tmp)\{v}

6: end while
7: V(tmp) ← V(tgt) 8: while V(tmp) = ∅ do

9: 10:

vCv←←arCgvm\a{xcvρ(2∈2)V}(tmp) mv

11: if arg maxc ∈Cv v ∈Vc ∩V(tgt) mv

= 1 then

12:

if arg maxc ∈Cv v ∈Vc ∩V(1) mv = 1 then

13:

c

← a random selection among

arg maxc ∈Cv v ∈Vc ∩V(1) mv

14:

else c ← arg maxc ∈Cv v ∈Vc ∩V(1) mv

15:

end if

16: else c ← arg maxc ∈Cv v ∈Vc ∩V(tgt) mv 17: end if 18: V(sel) ← V(sel) ∪ {Vc ∩ V(2)} 19: V(tmp) ← V(tmp)\{Vc ∩ V(tgt)}

20: end while

mv denote the metric value for a given variable v ∈ V(1). Also, let M denote the set of the metric values for all v ∈ V(1), that is, M = {mv|v ∈ V(1)} and we assume that M is an ordered
set based on the index of v. Let n(e) denote the number of edges which will be added
on the extension part of the protograph and let nv(e) denote

the number of edges which will be added to be connected to
v ∈ V(2). Let V(tgt) denote the set of target variable nodes in the HRC to be reinforced by edge addition. Let V(sel) denote

the set of selected degree-1 variable nodes which at least one added edge will be connected to. For v ∈ V(sel), let Cv(sel)

denote the set of selected check nodes in the IRC, each of which one added edge from v will be connected to. Let C(sel)

denote the set of selected check nodes in the IRC, which will be connected to any v ∈ V(sel) via added edges. That is, C(sel) = ∪v∈V(sel) Cv(sel). As we assumed that a check node
in the IRC can be connected to at most one edge added, all Cv(sel)’s are disjoint and we have |C(sel)| = n(e).
1) Construction of V(tgt) and V(sel): Since we assume that a main irregular PBRL LDPC is already designed, P(IRC) and P(EXT) are given and the set of ESBERs M is obtained by simulation. The processes to construct V(tgt) and V(sel) are

shown in Algorithm 1. The most unreliable nodes are included

in V(tgt) one by one before the sum of error rates of V(tgt)

exceeds a half of the total error rate of V(1).

Remind propagate

that adding an edge to vi(2) makes an additional extrinsic message to

a new some v

path ∈V

to
(1)

via c(i2) as shown determines how the

in Fig. variable

2. So nodes

the construction of in V(tgt) are boosted

V (sel) up. To

fcisoarncmobneVn(ecscoeltn)end⊂ectVote(dt2h)et,owmseoohmstaevuevnro∈enlliVyab(ttgloet)fivont∈dhecVri(2(tt)ghtoa).nneAvb∈syeVloen(ctegtetw)dwhcii(ict2hh) cwth(i h2e)e,lnaersgqeeulsievtcamtlienvn.gtAltyhllevtnh(i 2ee)xvtto∈ci(b2V)e.(tTignth)celcuroednecndaencitnbedeVmt(osuecll)(it.2ip)Tlaehreecaesnxedlceildcuatditoeedns criteria, in order of high-to-low priority, are as follows.
1) Largest sum of mv of v ∈ V(tgt) connected to a c ∈ C(2) 2) Largest sum of mv of v ∈ V(1) connected to a c ∈ C(2)
3) Random selection among the remaining multiple

candidates

It is noted that the excluded for V(sel)

last degree-1 variable because there will be

node v(λ22) no space

is to

always add an

edge if selected.

Example 1: We start from the protograph in Fig. 1. For

the example of edge addition, we need to consider only
P(IRC) ∪ P(EXT) and we will use the protomatrix representation [P(IRC)|P(EXT)] for convenience of visualization

as shown in Fig. 4. The size of the protomatrix is ρ2 ×
λ = 7 × 13 and the metric values are given as M = {0.04, 0.07, 0.12, 0.09, 0.08, 0.10} for V(1). Assume that we want to add two edges, that is, n(e) = 2.
The variable nodes are included to V(tgt) one by one from tFivnh(6i1en)oa,lrladalyrneg,rdewasvtne4(1dmh) ateihvstere0ico.V3tv(1htagealtr)unen=dso.id{tSvee(3so1x)ac,vre3(vee1(4)d1n,)so,vttv6(h1(6be1)e),}hcaaasnulhfdsoeowvf(4tn1ht)oeatasasrlutehmsueinmoschfl0uav.dd53(1ee0)dd., columns in Fig. 4(a).
Figs. 4(b) and (c) show the procedure to construct V(sel). tnt0ctTscVwawu7(oo.h(r21mnsoodg)e2eneel.c)matsetoahrFcffvoerveotogaes3(cmrr1ecrtdk)itvoficuan(5ntrabnvf2asonnolr)artede,edrgraliceteniathstsvahtbeoe6(bescd1ldvleh)(2seeao2uotr)ionnvwmvisaloa3((4yn11ibn0dt)o)l.d.ecie2fisanoFs2cmnnno(5.vFtd2nvohr(3iS)1edegtf)aoache.ofilrtrrlae4ewerind(stseccehbdt1(ote2)cvtas.)nahv4(re,c1rnS6(egl)go1cceeee)en(4kccl.ta2tnettn)evTcnet,dcodatcohi5(artn2debtiewn)oageeddbeosaivrlnttnececa(5.cl2d7(i(1ryaF)2n2ngn))ofpoec,,rnortudeoocrtmtecvvhc4(t(22eaeeva2v)rrsd(5)i,3(sie2no,1a)aal)inbttennnhhltlcigyddoeeest one based on the sum of mv for the connected target variable
nodes. Thus we need to use the second selection criterion, the sum of mv for the connected variable nodes in V(1). The sum vmf0tao7(.r21arg)x7cei,c1(tm2aa)vnunanimdsroifa0tvob.b1(r0l2ee4)c7(+sni2eso)l0desi.sece0stl70eed.ca+0tre7et0hd+.co0oau90nvg.de=h0r9ept0dh+u.e2ts00otso.,u0wfm8Voer=(isficsel4(0n)2la.a)2srlielg4syce. o0sShtn.,ai0dnv9tlchey+ee. VtA0sh(e.sle0ecll8o)ltanh==sdet {v5(2), v(12)}.
2) Construction of Cv(sel): The processes to construct Cv(sel) is shown in Algorithm 2 for a given v ∈ V(sel). The inputs of this algorithm include C(sel) and nv(e), where C(sel) is the set
of previously selected check nodes by running this algorithm for other variable nodes in V(sel) and nv(e) is the number of edges to be added to v. The construction of Cv(sel) determines

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RO et al.: PBRL LDPC CODES WITH AN ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR RELIABLE COMMUNICATIONS

723

Fig. 4. Example for adding two edges on the protograph in Fig. 1. (a) Construction of V(tgt), (b)(c) Construction of V(sel), (d)(e) Construction of Cv(sel) and the edge addition, (f) Final protograph with the add-on structure.

the exact locations of edges added to v and also determines which extrinsic message is brought to v and finally propagated to V(tgt). The extrinsic message will have the same reliability on average even if any check node position is randomly selected to add an edge because the selected check node is always connected to a degree-1 variable node and the extrinsic message will be dominated by the degree-1 variable node. So the reliability cannot be a criteria to construct Cv(sel).
Inducing a short cycle passing through v ∈ V(sel) is critical for error floor performance because v will still have a small degree even after adding some edges and the ACE value will be small. In fact, we can avoid short cycles in the paritycheck matrix by carefully lifting the protograph although there are short cycles in the protograph. Nonetheless, we try to avoid 4-cycles in the protograph when adding edges in a sense of blocking any possibility at source. Though 4-cycles are avoided in the lifted graph, a 4-cycle incurred by edge addition will make a message-passing from a variable node in V(tgt) to another variable node in V(tgt) and this corresponds to a circulation of weak messages, where “weak messages” refer to unreliable or highly correlated information exchanged between variable nodes during iterative decoding. Based on the above considerations, the selection criteria are prioritized as follows, with the motivations outlined below.
1) Avoiding 4-cycles in the protograph: to prevent the formation of feedback loops that circulate weak messages and deteriorate decoding performance.
2) Selecting check nodes that are connected to V(tgt) as many as possible: to maximize extrinsic message flow toward target variable nodes.
3) Choosing check nodes with the largest degree: to ensure that highly connected nodes can better distribute messages and improve global connectivity.
4) Random selection among remaining candidates: to avoid bias and maintain randomness when no strong preference is available.
When it is impossible to avoid 4-cycles in the protograph, we select to minimize the metric value of the only variable node in V(1) traversed by the 4-cycle. This can be interpreted as an effort to maximize the ACE under the existence of 4-cycles.

Algorithm 2 Construction of Cv(sel)

Input: P(IRC), P(EXT), V(tgt), C(sel), M, v ∈ V(sel), nv(e)

Output: Cv(sel)

1: 2:

Cv(sel) ← ∅ for i = 1 to

nv(e)

do

3: C(tmp) = {c ∈ Cv(low) \ {Cv(sel) ∪ C(sel)} | adding an edge

(v, c) induces no 4-cycle in P(IRC) ∪P(EXT) when assuming

that the edges corresponding to Cv(sel) are added} 4: if |C(tmp)| > 1 then

5:

C(tmp) ← arg maxc ∈C(tmp) Vc ∩ V(tgt)

6:

if C(tmp) = 1 then

7:

C(tmp) ← arg maxc ∈C(tmp) deg(c )

8:

if C(tmp) = 1 then

9:

c ← a random selection among C(tmp)

10:

else c ← arg maxc ∈C(tmp) deg(c )

11:

end if

12:

else c ← arg maxc ∈C(tmp) Vc ∩ V(tgt)

13:

end if

14: else if |C(tmp)| = 1 then

15:

Let c ∈ C(tmp)

16: else

17:

Let v denote the only variable node in V(1) traversed

by the 4-cycle with a given c

18:

c ← arg minc ∈Cv(low)\{Cv(sel)∪C(sel)} mv

19: end if

20: Cv(sel) ← Cv(sel) ∪ {c}

21: end for

Example 2: Continuing from Example 1, the number of
edges to be added is n(e) = 2 and there are two elements in V(sel). Thus, one edge will be added per selected variable node, that is, nv(e) = 1 for all v ∈ V(sel). Figs. 4(d) and 4(e) show the procedure to construct Cv(sel). We start from v = v5(2) because it is closer to the last position than the other. There are only vTtw5(h2o)us−cawcne(5d2i)hd−aavteevs(61Cc)(6v(−2se)l)ca6(n=2d) {bcc(7u7(22t)).s}Sealeeslcestcihtnoignwgcn7(c2(6i)2n)wFwiilgill.ln4ion(tddiu)n.cdeu4c-ecyanclye.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2025

Algorithm 3 Construction of Add-On Structure for Use at a
Fixed Rate
Input: P(IRC), M, n(e) Output: P(EXT) with n(e) edges added
1: Construct P(EXT) corresponding to I of size λ2 × λ2 2: (V(sel), V(tgt)) ← Run Algorithm 1 3: for v ∈ V(sel) in order do 4: nv(e) ← n(e)/|V(sel)| if v belongs to the first
n(e) − |V(sel)| n(e)/|V(sel)| elements of V(sel), nv(e) ← n(e)/|V(sel)| otherwise
5: end for 6: C(sel) ← {c ∈ C(2)|Vc ∩ V(2) ∩ V(sel) = ∅} 7: for v ∈ V(sel) in descending order of index in V(2) and
nv(e) = 0 do 8: Cv(sel) ← Run Algorithm 2 9: C(sel) ← C(sel) ∪ Cv(sel) 10: Add edges to P(EXT) such that v is connected to each
check node in Cv(sel)
11: end for

We move to c(42), and c6(2).
it was already

v= We

v(12) and exclude

there are four c(72) from the

candidates c2(2), c3(2), candidates because

selected for v = v5(2) and we assumed that

at most one edge is added per check node in Section III-B.

We also exclude c(52) because we allow only one added edge

in every path described in Fig. 3(b). It is noted that these

restrictions are described in Lines 6 and 9 of Algorithm 3, where the role of C(sel) is to exclude such check nodes. Since

selecting any of the candidates will induce a 4-cycle, we apply

the criterion of minimizing the sum of metric values of the ttscshwet4(i2ello)el,cmvarteiannmrdcii(6maa2cbi)(6unl.2em) tTtnwrmhoaoudveseetcrrsiascwenindevvia(1td1lhhua)ea,teevv4sea2(-1mc)cyC,o(22cvnv()ls(4gee1la.))t,nhTadehn=medc(64v2is{)(1-c1c0)6(ya,2.nc0)r}ld4eesspoawsefoecfvts1(irc1hva(2)eon2.l)wdy,To,nhcma(3en2lir)ydne, Fig. 4(e).

3) Overall Construction Procedure: Algorithm 3 shows
the overall procedure to construct the add-on structure for a code operating at only a fixed code rate. For given P(IRC), M, and n(e), the algorithm finally finds the location of edges to be added on P(EXT) by determining V(sel) and Cv(sel). For this, we first construct V(tgt) which currently have high error rates and
need to be reinforced by edge addition. Then, we construct V(sel) such that V(tgt) are most reinforced. The construction of V(sel) and V(tgt) is done by Algorithm 1. For a given n(e), we determine nv(e) for v ∈ V(sel) so that edges are distributed to the elements of V(sel) as uniformly as possible and, if a perfectly
uniform distribution is impossible, more edges are assigned to the first elements in V(sel). Then, Cv(sel) is constructed and the corresponding edges are added to P(EXT). The edge addition is performed in descending order of index of v ∈ V(sel) in V(2)
because adding an edge to v with a large index is restricted to
a small number of choices of check nodes. The construction of Cv(sel) is done by Algorithm 2.

IV. CONSTRUCTION OF THE ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR RATE-COMPATIBLE USE
A. New Metric for Rate-Compatible Use
As mentioned in Section III-C, the ESBER is the exact metric to represent the reliability of variable nodes in the protograph of the HRC. For use at a fixed rate, the ESBER can be obtained through simulations with no difficulty. However, for rate-compatible use, a common protograph is used to generate PBRL LDPC codes of various rates by lifting a sub-protomatrix taken from the topleft. The number of implementable rates is ρ2 + 1 if we make full use of the lifted code without puncturing of parity bits. It will require high complexity to simulate for such a large number of cases, especially for a large ρ2, to obtain the ESBER. Thus, for the construction of add-on structure of rate-compatible use, it is necessary to introduce a new metric which can be simply derived without brute-force simulations.
First, we start from approximately deriving the subblock BER. The actual subblock BER depends on the signal-to-noise ratio of the channel, the received values from the channel, the structure of protograph including the variable node degree, the number of iterations in decoding, and so on. We want to approximate it with a simple method so we consider only the variable node degree and a calibration parameter which is empirically obtained by simulation to reflect the effect of the other factors than the variable node degree.
This calibration method is based on the assumption that all the messages passed to variable nodes at the last iterations are converged to a similar value in the error floor region. Then, a posteriori log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of a variable node roughly becomes proportional to the variable node degree [27], [28], [29]. Let dv denote the degree of a variable node v. By using the Gaussian approximation [30], a posteriori LLR of v is regarded to follow N (dvα, 2dvα), where α denotes the calibration parameter. Accordingly, the approximate subblock BER (ASBER) corresponding to v denoted by v is defined as

v=Q

dvα . 2

(5)

The parameter α is constant for all v ∈ V(1) and calibrated for a pair of fixed code rate and Eb/No but it will be applied to all rates and Eb/No after the calibration. It is noted that α is empirically determined as α = 0.8 for all code constructions it is observed that the code performance is not sensitive to the value of α. In this manner, we can calculate the ASBER for every subblock of a given protograph and we propose to use this ASBER as a metric to construct the add-on structure for rate-compatible use.
In Fig. 5, the ASBER is compared to the ESBER for a PBRL LDPC code adopted in 5G NR with λ1 = 14. We choose the lowest achievable rate of the PBRL LDPC code 1/5 and another rate 1/3 and we normalize ESBER and ASBER by their means and standard deviations, respectively, for comparison. The calibration parameter α = 0.8 is obtained from the simulation with R = 1/5 and applies to the both cases. We see that the ASBER matches the ESBER well for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RO et al.: PBRL LDPC CODES WITH AN ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR RELIABLE COMMUNICATIONS

725

Fig. 5. Comparison of metrics for the message blocks of a base graph 2 LDPC code in 5G NR.

Fig. 6. Example for the processes to form the metric matrices M and M(n).

both R = 1/5 and R = 1/3. It is noted that matching with

the normalized values is enough to show the effectiveness of

the ASBER because the result from the proposed construction

algorithms does not depend on a scaling or a shift of the metric

values.
Let ρ2 (≤ ρ2) denote the number of rows in P(IRC) to be included in the submatrix for rate-compatible use. The size

of the submatrix of the whole protomatrix becomes (ρ1 +

ρ2) × (λ1 1 ≤ ρ2 ≤

+ ρ2). We ρ2 and let

want to M(BER)

find the denote

set the

of ASBERs for every matrix whose (i, j)-th

element is the ASBER calculated with the weight of the j-th

column in the submatrix of size (ρ1 + i) × λ1. It is noted that the size of M(BER) is ρ2 × λ1.
The matrix M(BER) cannot be directly exploited for the rate-

compatible case. The reason is that adding a 1 to the i-th row in
P(EXT) will have an impact on all the rates with ρ2 > i as well as the rate with ρ2 = i. So we need to introduce another metric matrix M for the rate-compatible use and make the (i, j)-th

element mi,j of M become a cumulative metric effective for

all rates effective

with ρ2 ≥ i. a 1 is added

The value of mi,j should represent how to the i-th row in P(EXT) to reinforce the

j-th variable node by making a path from the i-th check node to the j-th variable node in P(IRC) via a variable node and a check node in P(EXT) as shown in Fig. 2.

To form the i-th row of M, we might simply accumulate from the i-th row to the last row of M(BER). However, every

row can have different mean and variance values and thus

its contribution to the accumulation can be non-uniform. To

solve this, we normalize every row of M(BER) before the

accumulation. Let standard deviation

μ(i BER) of the

and σi(BER) elements in

denote the mean and the the i-th row in M(BER).

Then, the (i, j)-th element mi,j of M is calculated as

mi,j

=

ρ2 l=i

ml(,Bj ER) − μl(BER) σl(BER)

.

It is noted that a weighted sum of the normalized rows is possible but we assume the equal weight in this paper, that is, every rate happens uniformly often.
Example 3: Fig. 6(a) is an example for P(HRC) and P(IRC) with λ1 = 6, ρ1 = 2, and ρ2 = 7. Since the (i, j)-th element in M(BER) is calculated with the weight of the j-th column in the top-left submatrix of size (2 + i) × 6, we need to first form a 7 × 6 matrix by accumulating the rows from the top to the current as shown in Fig. 6(b). Then, we calculate each ASBER by applying (5) to the corresponding element in Fig. 6(b) to form M(BER) as shown in Fig. 6(c). Then, we calculate the mean and the standard deviation of the elements in each row and normalize the elements by the mean and the standard deviation. The resulting matrix is shown in Fig. 6(d). Finally, each row is replaced by the accumulation of the rows from itself to the last row to form M as shown in Fig. 6(e).

B. Construction Algorithm

Algorithm 3 was devised for use at a fixed rate and the

added 1s can locate anywhere in the lower triangular part. If

the added 1s are concentrated in a few rows, the edge addition

will not be effective for some code rates in rate-compatible

use. So it is important to distribute the added 1s for the rate-

compatible use so that they keep regular intervals in rows. The

basic design principles for the rate-compatible use are similar

to those for the fixed-rate use but the design for the rate-

compatible case partitions the rows in the extension part and

uniformly adds the edges in a sequential manner from the top

to the bottom. In this procedure, an edge addition in the current

partition will affect all the lower rate cases and the previously

added edges pose new conditions to the next partitions, which

is different from the fixed-rate case.

We use the metric matrix M to determine the location of

the added edges. We remind that reinforce a variable node vj(1) by

an added edge making a new

(c(i2), vi(2)) path from

can c(i 2)

to vj(1) via vi(2) and c(i2) when c(i2) is connected to vj(1) (Refer

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2025

to Fig. 2). When we want to add an edge to the i-th check node in P(IRC) for rate-compatible use, we need to choose
the largest among the elements in the i-th row of M. If mi,j is the largest, there must exist i < i such that pi(I,Rj C) = 1 to reinforce vj(1). Thus, adding an edge (c(i2), vi(2)) for vj(1) is completely specified by selecting the positions (i, j) and (i , j) in the matrix representation. We will call (i, j) and (i , j) the first and the second primitive positions denoted by φ = (i, j) and σ = (i , j), respectively.
Algorithm 4 shows the detailed procedure to construct the add-on structure for rate-compatible use. The inputs are P(IRC), M, M(n) whose row is normalized from the same row in M, and the number of added 1s n(e). The example for M(n)
based on Example 3 is shown in Fig. 6(f). The goal of the
algorithm is to find the first and the second primitive positions φ1, . . . , φn(e) and σ1, . . . , σn(e) . First, the set of row indices {1, . . . , ρ2} is partitioned into n(e) + 2 groups as uniform as possible. Except the first and the last, a 1 will be added within each row group of P(EXT).
To select candidates for the first primitive positions based
on M, we delete mi,j from M which satisfies at least one of the following four deletion conditions:
1) there is no i < i such that pi(I,Rj C) = 1, 2) mi,j is smaller than the half of the variance of all
elements in M(n), 3) pi(,IjRC) = 1, 4) there exists i < i for which pi(I,Rj C) = pi(I,Rj C) = pi(,IjRC) =
1 and m(in,)j > −1.0 or m(i,nj) > −1.0 for j = j. Condition 1) is to delete the first primitive positions which
have no possibility to be paired with the second primitive
positions. Here, i means a candidate for the second primitive
position. In Condition 2), we set the threshold of metric values
to be unreliable as the half of the variance of all elements in M.
It is noted that each row of M has a zero mean. Condition 3) is to avoid a 4-cycle traversing the position (i, j) in P(IRC), which
is generated by an edge addition in the i-th row. Condition 4) is to avoid a 4-cycle traversing the positions (i, j ) and (i , j ) in P(IRC) and the positions (i , i ) and (i, i ) in P(EXT), which is generated by the edge addition at the position (i, i ) of P(EXT). If it is impossible to avoid 4-cycles, we allow 4-cycles when the j -th variable node is very reliable, that is, m(in,)j < −1.0 and mi(,nj) < −1.0. Every column including at least one remaining element after removing corresponds to a target variable node
which need to be reinforced.
Now, we select at most one first primitive position per
each target column among the remaining elements from the
top row group in order so that the sum of the corresponding
metric values is maximized. When the maximum is not
unique, we give a priority to the sum with the associated
columns having a large value of cycles metric [31]. When
the number of the selected positions is less than the desired
number of added 1s, we need to select more first primitive
positions for the remaining row groups and we get to allow
more than one first primitive position per target column. We
select the maximum element out of the target columns for
each remaining row group in order the position becomes a

Fig. 7. Example for adding two edges for P(IRC) in Example 3 based on Algorithm 4. (a) M after deletion based on the four conditions, (b) Selection of φ1 and φ2.
first primitive position. If a target column has multiple first primitive positions, the associated second primitive positions are determined as differently as possible. It is noted that two different first primitive positions in a column associated with the same second primitive position mean that two 1s are added in a column of P(EXT).
When determining a second primitive position, there can be multiple candidates and we need selection criteria. Each position (i, j) is associated with a set of candidates for row index of the second primitive position Ai,j = {ai,j,1, . . . , ai,j,|Ai,j|} as defined in Algorithm 4. For each ai,j,l, l = 1, . . . , |Ai,j|, define a set Bi,j,l = {mi(n,)k|pi(I,RkC) = 1, i = ai,j,l, k = 1, . . . , λ1} and another set Ci,j,l = {b|b > 0.5, b ∈ Bi,j,l}. The set B includes the metric values of the variable nodes reinforced by the edge addition with the second primitive position (ai,j,l, j). The set C includes the metric values of the unreliable variable nodes. To ensure that the added edges effectively reinforce the overall reliability across rates while minimizing harmful short cycles, the selection criteria for choosing the second primitive positions are prioritized based on the following motivations.
1) i = arg maxai,j,l∈Ai,j c∈Ci,j,l c: prioritize reinforcing the most unreliable variable nodes by targeting those with the largest cumulative unreliable metrics.
2) i = arg maxai,j,l∈Ai,j b∈Bi,j,l b: in case of a tie, further select the candidate contributing to the largest overall improvement across all associated variable nodes.
3) Random selection among Ai,j: if no significant difference exists, random selection ensures diversity and avoids structural bias.
Example 4: Continuing from Example 3, we follow Algorithm 4 with P(IRC), M, and M(n) shown in Figs. 6(a), 6(e), and 6(f), respectively, to add two edges, i.e., n(e) = 2. From partitioning, we have R1 = {1, 2}, R2 = {3, 4}, R3 = {5, 6}, and R4 = {7}. The rows corresponding R1 and R4 will not be added any edges and we want to add one edge in each of R2 and R3. After the deletion based on the four conditions, M has the form shown in Fig. 7(a), where the shaded slots correspond to the positions where there are 1s in P(IRC). Since the third and the sixth columns contain at least one element, we have t = 2 and j1, j2 ∈ {3, 6}. We have two permutations (j1, j2) = (3, 6), (6, 3) and the first permutation occurs the exit from the for loop and the second permutation makes the sum 9.19 = 4.48 + 4.71. Then we have u = 2, φ1 = (3, 6), and φ2 = (5, 3). In this example, all n(e) edges are already added so the for loop from line 14 is not executed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RO et al.: PBRL LDPC CODES WITH AN ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR RELIABLE COMMUNICATIONS

727

Algorithm 4 Construction of Add-On Structure for Rate- denote the number of variable nodes in the protograph of the

Compatible Use

HRC after puncturing and then the number of punctured nodes

Input: P(IRC), M, M(n), n(e) Output: Positions to add n(e) 1s in P(EXT)
1: Partition the set of row indices {1, . . . , ρ2} into n(e) + 2
sets R1, . . . , Rn(e)+2 as uniform as possible. 2: Delete mi,j from M if it satisfies at least one of the deletion
conditions.

becomes λ1 − λ1. For the rate-compatible use of protographs, let ρ2 denote the number of check nodes of the IRC for a given submatrix and let λ2 denote the number of variable nodes in the extension part of the submatrix. The corresponding code
rate is calculated as R = (λ1 − ρ1)/(λ1 + λ2). We simulate with two instances of original PBRL LDPC

3: Let t denote the number of the columns containing at codes: an instance of 5G NR LDPC code from base graph 2

least one element and j1, . . . , jt denote the indices of those columns. 4: Define Ai,j = {i |pi(I,Rj C) = 1, i < i not involved with the deletion condition 4)}.
5: for all permutations of j1, . . . , jt do 6: sum ← 0
7: for k = 1 to t do

(BG2) [8] and an instance of PBRL LDPC code introduced
as a short-blocklength (SB) PBRL design example in [6]. The 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code has a 42 × 52 protomatrix and the first two variable nodes are always punctured. The detailed parameters are λ1 = 14, ρ1 = 4, ρ2 = λ2 = 38. The code rate becomes R = 1/5 when the full protomatrix is used with the puncturing. We choose z = 80 and the code length

8:

If there is no element in the jk-th column with Rk+1,

exit from this for loop.

9:

sum ← sum + maxi∈Rk+1 {mi,jk }

10: end for

becomes 4000 after puncturing, and all the shift values are found in [8]. The SB PBRL LDPC code in [6] originally has a 17 × 25 protomatrix and the first variable node is always punctured. The protograph includes parallel edges and the two-

11: end for

step lifting is used to generate the code. Since we do not

12: Let u denote the number of the elements contributing to consider the case of parallel edges in this paper, we try to add

the final maximum of sum.

edges in the pre-lifted protograph and we will think of the

13: Let φ1 = (i1, j1), . . . , φu = (iu, ju) denote the positions of

the elements.

14: for k = 1 to n(e) − u do

15: Let φu+k = (iu+k, ju+k) be the position of the maximum

element for Ru+k+1 in M except the column of the

previously selected in this for loop.

16: Find the unique l such that jl = ju+k for l = 1, . . . , u.

17: if Aiu+k,ju+k = Ail,ju+k = {i } for some i then

18:

σl = σu+k = (i , ju+k)

19: else Determine different i ∈ Ail,jl and i ∈ Aiu+k,ju+k following the selection priority criteria for σl = (i , jl) and

σu+k = (i , ju+k).

20: end if

pre-lifted protograph as the original protograph. The pre-lift size is 3 and the second lift size is 43 by following the way in [6]. So the size of the protomatrix is now 51 × 75 and the detailed parameters are λ1 = 30, ρ1 = 6, ρ2 = λ2 = 45. The code rate becomes R = 1/3 when the full protomatrix is used with the puncturing of the first three variable nodes. We choose z = 43 and the code length becomes 3096 after puncturing.
We need to lift the protographs resulting from Algorithms 3 and 4 to generate the proposed codes with the add-on structure. For the existing edges in the original protographs, we take the original shift values defined in [8] for the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code and use the circulant progressive edge growth

21: end for

(CPEG) and ACE algorithm in [6] to lift for the SB PBRL

22: Determine i ∈ Ail,jl following the selection priority criteria for the remaining σl = (i , jl).

23:

From for l

each pair of determined φl = (il, jl) = 1, . . . , n(e), the position to add

a1ndinσlP=(EX(Til),

jl) is

(il, il).

LDPC code. To lift added edges, we use the error minimization
progressive edge growth algorithm [32] which maximizes the
cycle length and the ACE.
Using Algorithm 3, we generate the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC codes with edges added for n(e) = 4, 5, 6, 8 and the SB PBRL LDPC codes with edges added for n(e) = 5, 6, 8, 10. To verify

the proposed metric, we use the ASBER as well as the ESBER

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

and to generate the codes despite the case of a fixed rate. The 5G BG2 and the SB PBRL LDPC codes are simulated at fixed

In this section, the BLER of PBRL LDPC codes with the rates R = 1/5 and R = 1/3, and the BLER performances

add-on structure is compared to that of the original PBRL are shown in Fig. 8. In each figure, the codes with the add-

LDPC codes via simulations. We declared a block error when on structures outperform the original PBRL LDPC code in

any error happens in only the message part not the entire the error floor region while they show worse waterfalls than codeword. Modulation is QPSK and the received signals are the original code. As n(e) increases, the waterfall degrades

generated under the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) but the slope of the error floor becomes steep, which shows

channel and the Rayleigh fading channel. We use the sum- a tradeoff between waterfall and error floor performances.

product and the min-sum algorithms for decoding and the Regarding the metrics, the codes constructed from the ASBER

maximum number of iterations set to 50 for all simulations. is slightly worse than the codes constructed from the ESBER

A few high-degree variable nodes in the protographs of PBRL but the gaps are negligible and the validity of ASBER is

LDPC codes are often punctured for better DE thresholds proven.

and any submatrix from the top-left of the full protomatix Considering more practical use of the codes, we simu-

can be used to implement the rate-compatibility. Thus, let λ1 late two kinds of min-sum decodings with 6-bit-quantization
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

728
10 0 10 -1 10 -2 10 -3 10 -4 10 -5 10 -6 10 -7 10 -8

BLER BLER

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2025

100

5G BG2, original

5G BG2, add-on, ESBER, n(e)=4 5G BG2, add-on, ESBER, n(e)=5

10-1

5G BG2, add-on, ESBER, n(e)=6

5G BG2, add-on, ESBER, n(e)=8

10-2

5G BG2, add-on, ASBER, n(e)=4

5G BG2, add-on, ASBER, n(e)=5

5G BG2, add-on, ASBER, n(e)=6

10-3

5G BG2, add-on, ASBER, n(e)=8

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

-3.8

-3.6

-3.4

-3.2

-3

Es/N0 [dB]

10-8

-2.8

-2.6

-2.4

SB PBRL, original SB PBRL, add-on, ESBER, n(e)=5 SB PBRL, add-on, ESBER, n(e)=6 SB PBRL, add-on, ESBER, n(e)=8 SB PBRL, add-on, ESBER, n(e)=10 SB PBRL, add-on, ASBER, n(e)=5 SB PBRL, add-on, ASBER, n(e)=6 SB PBRL, add-on, ASBER, n(e)=8 SB PBRL, add-on, ASBER, n(e)=10

-3.8

-3.6

-3.4

-3.2

-3

Es/N0 [dB]

-2.8

-2.6

Fig. 8. BLER curves of the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC codes of R = 1/5 and the SB PBRL LDPC codes of R = 1/3 under the SPA decoding.

BLER BLER BLER

100 10-1 10-2 10-3 10-4 10-5

5G BG2, original 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=4 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=5 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=6 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=8

100 10-1 10-2 10-3 10-4 10-5 10-6

5G BG2, original 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=3 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=4 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=5 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=6

10 0 10 -1 10 -2 10 -3 10 -4 10 -5 10 -6

5G BG2, original 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=4 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=5 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=6 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=8

10-6

10-7

-3.8

-3.6

-3.4

-3.2

-3

-2.8

-2.6

-2.4

10 -7

-3.8

-3.6

-3.4

-3.2

-3

-2.8

-2.6

-2.4

-3.8

-3.6

-3.4

-3.2

-3

-2.8

-2.6

-2.4

Es/N0 [dB]

Es/N0 [dB]

Es/N0 [dB]

Fig. 9. BLER curves of the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC codes of R = 1/5 under the 6-bit quantized min-sum algorithms with maximum iteration 50 and the SPA with maximum iteration 20.

for the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC codes of R = 1/5 and n(e) = 4, 5, 6, 8. They are the normalized min-sum algorithm (NMSA) with normalization factor 0.64 and the offset minsum algorithm (OMSA) with offset 0.5. The parameters are found by simulation to have the best BLER. In each figure in Figs. 9(a) and 9(b), the codes with the add-on structures outperform the original PBRL LDPC code in the error floor region while they show worse waterfalls than the original code similarly to the case of the SPA. In another setting, we reduce the maximum number of iteration from 50 to 20 for the SPA decoding and the corresponding simulation results are shown in Fig. 9(c). Though the convergence speed is slightly lower as the number of added edges increases, the proposed codes show a significant advantage over the original code under these practical setting.
Using Algorithm 4, we generate the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code with n(e) = 5 edges added and the SB PBRL LDPC code with n(e) = 8 edges added for rate-compatible use. We simulate various rates with λ2 = 12, 14, 17, 18, 21, 28, 38 for the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code and with λ2 = 21, 23, 26, 45 for the SB PBRL LDPC code. The largest λ2 corresponds to

the full protomatrix for both codes. We compare the BLER performances of the original PBRL LDPC codes, the proposed codes constructed for use at the fixed rates (λ2 = 38 for the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code and λ2 = 45 for the SB PBRL LDPC code), and the proposed codes constructed for the rate-compatible use as shown in Fig. 10. It is shown that the proposed codes have quite lower error floors than the original codes for all rates except that the proposed codes for the fixed rates have similar to or slightly better error floor performances than the original codes. The reason is that when the added 1s mostly locate near the bottom of the protomatrix in the construction for the fixed rates, submatrices for high rates will include no or few added edges. It is also shown that the proposed codes for rate-compatible use show lower error floors than the proposed codes for the fixed rates for all rates especially high rates.
We simulate the Rayleigh fading channel with the proposed add-on with n(e) = 4 and the original 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code and the results are shown in Fig. 11. The cross point occurs at around BLER 10−6 while the cross point occurred between 10−4 and 10−5 in the AWGN channel case. We

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RO et al.: PBRL LDPC CODES WITH AN ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR RELIABLE COMMUNICATIONS

729

Fig. 10. BLER curves of the 5G BG2 and the SB PBRL LDPC codes with the SPA decoding for various rates.

also simulate a hybrid use of add-on with n(e) = 6 under the Rayleigh fading channel. The effective Es/N0 for each received codeword is estimated and it is assumed known at the transmitter. If it is larger than −3dB, the add-on is applied for encoding and decoding. Otherwise, the original 5G BG2 code is applied. The results are shown in Fig. 11 and the horizontal axis in this case represents the effective Es/N0. It is seen that the hybrid add-on has lower BLER than the original code after the effective Es/N0 = 3dB.
The computational complexity in LDPC decoding can be measured by the number of operations per iteration multiplied by the average number of iterations. In an iteration, the number of operations is roughly proportional to the number of edges. In the case of n(e) = 6, the number of edges in the original protograph is 197 and the number becomes 203 after the edge addition, which corresponds to 3% increase. We measured the average number of iterations by simulation when the maximum number of iterations is limited to 20 as shown in Table II. As the number of added edges grows, the average number of iterations also increases, which means the convergence speed is low.
Lastly, we mention the DE thresholds and the minimum distances of the codes. We compare the threshold values of the original 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code and the four 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC codes with n(e) = 4, 5, 6, 8 constructed for fixed rate R = 1/5 and also the threshold values of the original SB PBRL LDPC code and the four SB PBRL LDPC codes with n(e) = 5, 6, 8, 10 constructed for fixed rate R = 1/5 as shown in Table III. The threshold values are represented in Eb/N0 and obtained by the PEXIT analysis. It is shown that the threshold value gets worse as the number of added edges increases and this implies the tradeoff between the waterfall and the error floor performances.
Since it is impossible to theoretically calculate the minimum distances of the codes we generated, we show an empirical measure for the minimum distance instead. In BLER simulations, block errors are classified into two cases: 1) syndrome check failure at the last iteration and 2) termination of decoding from syndrome check success but error bits found in the message bits. The second case is caused by a small minimum

100 10-2

5G BG2, original 5G BG2, original, effective 5G BG2, add-on, n(e)=4 5G BG2, hybrid add-on, n(e)=6, effective

BLER

10-4

10-6

10-8

-3.5

-3

-2.5

-2

-1.5

Es/N0 [dB]

Fig. 11. BLER curves of the 5G BG2, the proposed add-on, and the hybrid add-on codes under the Rayleigh fading channel.

distance and we will call them undetected block errors. In the simulation, an undetected block error is counted when decoding terminates successfully in terms of the syndrome check, but errors are detected in the message part. To ensure accuracy, we separately track these undetected events during decoding. In Table IV, the undetected BLER is shown via simulations for the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code with/without the add-on structure for R = 1/5. For all Eb/N0 values, the simulation continues until at least 100 block errors are observed and we count the undetected block errors among them. The maximum number of decoding iterations is set to 50 identical to all the other simulations. It is seen that the proposed code shows lower undetected BLERs than the original code and any undetected block errors of the proposed codes are not found at Eb/N0 = 0.6, 0.8.

VI. CONCLUSION
To achieve low error floors, we proposed the algorithms to add edges to the extension part of any given protograph of irregular PBRL LDPC codes. The edge addition was

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2025

TABLE II AVERAGE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS WITH RESPECT TO Eb/N0 FOR THE ORIGINAL AND THE PROPOSED LDPC CODES FOR R = 1/5

TABLE III DE THRESHOLDS (Eb/N0) OF THE PBRL LDPC CODES
TABLE IV UNDETECTED BLER FOR THE 5G BG2 PBRL
LDPC CODE WITH R = 1/5
performed in a way to reinforce variable nodes with large subblock BER in the original PBRL LDPC code. We proposed the two construction algorithms, one for use at a fixed rate and the other for rate-compatible use. For the metric used in the latter algorithm, we derived the ASBER which was shown well-matched with the ESBER. For simulations, we generated the add-on structures for the 5G BG2 PBRL LDPC code and the SB PBRL LDPC code in [6]. It was shown that the proposed codes have lower error floors than the original codes for fixed rates and for rate-compatible use.
The proposed metrics were effective for constructing the add-on structure to lower the error floors. Nonetheless, the ESBER is a kind of resultant metric while the main cause of error floors is trapping sets, and the ASBER was derived from the simple approximation with calibration. Thus it will be a good research topic to derive a new metric directly based on trapping sets and its approximation through theoretical analysis.
The add-on structure can be implementation-friendly in encoding and decoding with respect to the backwardcompatibility for the existing PBRL LDPC codes. The edge addition will be useful when an original PBRL LDPC code was already constructed to have a good threshold and then a set of added edges are determined by the proposed construction algorithms to have low error floor. The PBRL LDPC code with edge addition can effectively cover multiple target BLER points with/without the edge addition adaptively. The adaptive use of edge addition corresponds to implementing two PBRL LDPC codes for high-speed communications and reliable communications in an efficient way while keeping the system compatible with the original PBRL LDPC code.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G, Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, “Highthroughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques & dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421–1430, May 2015.
[3] J. Nadal and A. Baghdadi, “Parallel and flexible 5G LDPC decoder architecture targeting FPGA,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Syst., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1141–1151, Jun. 2021.
[4] Z. He, K. Peng, J. Song, and Y. Zhang, “Sliding window decoding for QC-SC-LDPC codes under the constraint of implementation complexity,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 305–316, Jun. 2022.
[5] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” IPN Progr. Rep., vol. 42, no. 154, pp. 42–154, 2003.
[6] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.
[7] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[8] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing Channel Coding (Release 15), 3GPP Standard 138 212, Dec. 2017.
[9] M. S. Islam, R. Abozariba, D. Mi, M. N. Patwary, D. He, and A. Taufiq Asyhari, “Design and evaluation of multi-layer NOMA on NR physical layer for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 42–56, Mar. 2024.
[10] Z. He, K. Peng, C. Zhang, and J. Song, “Low-rate LDPC code design for DTMB-A,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 739–746, Jun. 2024.
[11] S. Moloudi, M. Lentmaier, and A. Graell i Amat, “Spatially coupled turbo-like codes: A new trade-off between waterfall and error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 3114–3123, May 2019.
[12] M. Jang, J. W. Kang, and S.-H. Kim, “Design of irregular LDPC codes with degree-set and degree-sum distributions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Personal, Indoor Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC), 2012, pp. 1925–1930.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[14] E. F. Pupo, C. C. González, J. Montalban, P. Angueira, M. Murroni, and E. Iradier, “Artificial intelligence aided low complexity RRM algorithms for 5G-MBS,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 110–122, Mar. 2024.
[15] H.-H. Liu and H.-Y. Wei, “5G NR multicast and broadcast QoS enhancement with flexible service continuity configuration,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 689–703, Sep. 2022.
[16] V. K. Shrivastava, S. Baek, and Y. Baek, “5G evolution for multicast and broadcast services in 3GPP release 17,” IEEE Commun. Stand. Mag., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 70–76, Sep. 2022.
[17] J. J. Gimenez et al., “5G new radio for terrestrial broadcast: A forwardlooking approach for NR-MBMS,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 356–368, Jun. 2019.
[18] Y. Xu et al., “Enhancements on coding and modulation schemes for LTE-based 5G terrestrial broadcast system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 481–489, Jun. 2020.
[19] “Framework and overall objectives of the future development of IMT for 2030 and beyond,” Int. Telecommun. Union, Geneva, Switzerland, Rec. ITU-R M.2160-0, Nov. 2023.
[20] H.-Y. Kwak, D.-Y. Yun, Y. Kim, S.-H. Kim, and J.-S. No, “Boosted neural decoders: Achieving extreme reliability of LDPC codes for 6G networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1089–1102, Apr. 2025.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RO et al.: PBRL LDPC CODES WITH AN ADD-ON STRUCTURE FOR RELIABLE COMMUNICATIONS

731

[21] X. Wu, M. Jiang, C. Zhao, L. Ma, and Y. Wei, “Low-rate PBRL-LDPC codes for URLLC in 5G,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 800–803, Oct. 2018.
[22] S. V. Ranganathan, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Quasi-cyclic protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes for short blocklengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3758–3777, Jun. 2019.
[23] K. J. Jeon and K. S. Kim, “Accumulate repeat accumulate check accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 4585–4599, Nov. 2017.
[24] F. Amirzade, M.-R. Sadeghi, and D. Panario, “Quasi-cyclic protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes with girth 6 and shortest length,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2021, pp. 368–373.
[25] M. Luby, “LT codes,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Found. Comput. Sci. (FOCS), 2002, pp. 271–280.
[26] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasicyclic LDPC codes on constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2648–2671, May 2012.

[27] Y. Xu et al., “Variable LLR scaling in min-sum decoding for irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 606–613, Dec. 2014.
[28] L. Wang, C. Terrill, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “LDPC decoding with degree-specific neural message weights and RCQ decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 1912–1924, Apr. 2024.
[29] E. Boutillon, C. Winstead, and F. Ghaffari, “The syndrome bit flipping algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 1684–1688, Jul. 2023.
[30] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[31] X. Liu, F. Xiong, Z. Wang, and S. Liang, “Design of binary LDPC codes with parallel vector message passing,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 1363–1375, Apr. 2018.
[32] E. Sharon and S. Litsyn, “Constructing LDPC codes by error minimization progressive edge growth,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 359–368, Mar. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

