IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

3000505

Mutual Soft-Information Improvement Techniques for Lower Layer Performance Improvement in Double-Layered
Magnetic Recording Systems
Anawin Khametong1, Simon John Greaves 2, and Chanon Warisarn 1
1College of Advanced Manufacturing Innovation, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang (KMITL), Bangkok 10520, Thailand
2Research Institute of Electrical Communication (RIEC), Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan

Double-layer magnetic recording (DLMR) development aims to increase areal density (AD) by stacking multiple recording layers on the same platter. This has the potential to revolutionize magnetic recording. On the other hand, bit-patterned magnetic recording (BPMR) uses nanoscale bit islands to enhance storage density, reduce transition noise, and maintain thermal stability. This study focuses on combining BPMR and DLMR to further increase AD. Unfortunately, this approach encounters difficulties in separating data from different layers within a single readback signal, which results in poor performance. Retrieving data from the lower layer is additionally complicated by its distance from the reader, leading to degraded bit-error-rate (BER) performance. To address this, we have developed mutual soft-information improvement techniques (MIITs) such as the maximum soft-information (MSI) and sum soft-information (SSI) schemes. These techniques enhance the soft-information output obtained from a soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) detector. Additionally, we propose three iterative systems that exchange soft information between SOVA and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Our demonstrations show improved BER performance for both upper and lower layers, compared to conventional systems with single-layer media at the same AD of 4 Tb/in2.
Index Terms— Iterative systems, magnetic recording, multiple recording layers, signal processing, soft-information improvement.

I. INTRODUCTION
T HE demand for increased data storage capacity is rapidly growing, and current perpendicular magnetic recording technology is becoming inadequate. To address these limitations, advanced technologies such as 2-D magnetic recording [1], heat-assisted magnetic recording [2], microwave-assisted magnetic recording [3], and bit-patterned magnetic recording (BPMR) [4] have been continuously developed and proposed. BPMR shows promise by using single-domain magnetic islands arranged in a regular pattern to minimize noise and improve precision. Furthermore, to boost data density, double-layer magnetic recording (DLMR) [5] introduces an additional media layer to the patterned media, positioning it as one of the key technologies for future magnetic recording systems.
The recent research on DLMR has primarily focused on reducing signal degradation caused by inter-layer interference (ILI) [6], [7]. Two double-layer configurations for BPMR systems [6] have been proposed: rectangular close-packed arrays of circular islands and hexagonally packed arrays. These configurations, along with a new equalizer design, have demonstrated improved performance compared to singlelayer BPMR systems. However, traditional systems are not as effective when there is a lot of media noise, and they also

perform poorly in the lower layer, which is further from the reader. Recent research has introduced an innovative signalprocessing approach for double-layer BPMR systems, which involves creating a superposition signal by aligning bit islands across both layers [7] and using outer iteration to improve the lower layer performance. The signal was generated using a discrete-time approach and an iterative processing technique. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [8] and a soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) detector [9] were employed in an iterative process. However, challenges still exist in extracting signals from the lower layer due to the ILI effect and distance between the reader and lower layer media, which harms the bit error rate (BER) performance.
In this study, therefore, we propose mutual soft-information improvement techniques (MIITs) which include maximum soft-information (MSI) and sum soft-information (SSI) schemes. MIITs are designed to improve the soft information transmitted from the SOVA detector through MSI and SSI schemes. Additionally, we also present three iterative systems based on the proposed MIITs, which facilitate the exchange of soft information between SOVA and LDPC. At the same total areal density (AD) of 4 Tb/in2, improved BER performance for both the upper and lower layers can be achieved compared to a conventional system with single-layer media.

Received 31 October 2024; revised 4 February 2025 and 13 February 2025; accepted 19 February 2025. Date of publication 24 February 2025; date of current version 27 August 2025. Corresponding author: C. Warisarn (e-mail: chanon.wa@kmitl.ac.th).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TMAG.2025.3544756.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2025.3544756

II. CHANNEL MODEL
The block diagram of the BPMR channel is illustrated in Fig. 1, depicting our proposed iterative system with MIITs. Three readers are used to retrieve the data from both upper and lower layers as shown in Fig. 2. The bit-patterned media

0018-9464 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3000505

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the iterative system with mutual information improvement techniques.

The continuous-time readback waveforms from the upper and lower layers can be expressed as

b( j)(x, t) =

m( j)(ξ, η)h( j)(x − ξ, t − η)dξ dη (1)
S

where j ∈ {1, 2} represents the recording layer index. Then,

the continuous-time readback signal from the ith track, ri,t , can be obtained from

Fig. 2. Bit-island arrangement of DLMR using three readers at an AD of 4 Tb/in2 and Tx = Tz = 18 nm.

for the DLMR system had a total AD of 4 Tb/in2, that is, 2 Tb/in2 per layer. We begin by arranging the bit islands in

each layer into rectangular arrays, while the bit islands in

different layers were offset to reduce ILI. The island pitch

was Tx = Tz = 18 nm, and the diameter was 10 nm. The

thicknesses of both the upper and lower layers were 2 nm,

and the vertical separation between the layers was 1 nm [6].

The spacing between the readers and the top surface of the

upper layer was 2 nm. Three readers denoted as H-I, H-II,

and H-III read the data from the i − 1th, ith, and i + 1th

tracks, respectively. The i − 1th and i + 1th tracks belong to

the upper layer, and the ith track belongs to the lower layer.

H-I and H-III were moved closer together by 25% of the track

pitch (Tz) for this study. In an iterative system with mutual information improvement

techniques, as shown in Fig. 1, the three input sequences,

ai(−1)1,k , ai(,2k), and ai(+1)1,k , are encoded using LDPC encoders and

lead

to

yield

the

encoded

sequences,

ui(−1)1,k ,

ui(,2k),

and

u

(1) i +1,k

,

respectively.

After

that,

the

sequences

u

(1) i −1,k

and

ui(+1)1,k

are

written to the upper layer on the i − 1th and i + 1th tracks at

the

kth

bit,

respectively,

while

the

sequence

u

(2) i,k

is

written

to

the lower layer on the ith track. Here, the superscripts “(1)”

and “(2)” imply operations on the upper and lower layers,

respectively. The writing process was assumed to be perfect

in this study.

Three continuous-time readback waveforms were acquired

from the three readers. The continuous-time readback wave-

forms, b(x, t), of each layer were created from a 2-D

convolution of the bit-patterned media magnetization, centered

at (x, t), and the read head sensitivity response, h(x, y)

[10] where the magnetization, m(ξ, η) ∈ ±1 signifies the

magnetization at position (ξ, η) in the down- and cross-track

directions.

ri,t = bi,t + ni,t

(2)

where ni,t is assumed to be electronic noise and bi,t is the superposition of the continuous-time readback waveforms bi(,1t) and bi(,2t). By using an oversampling technique, the discretetime readback sequences of the i − 1th and i + 1th tracks,
ri−1,k′ and ri+1,k′ can be generated from

ri−1,k′ = ri−1,t t=0.5k′Tx , and

ri+1,k′ = ri+1,t t=0.5k′Tx

(3)

respectively, where k′ represents the oversampling index at t/0.5 Tx , and Tx is the bit period. In contrast, the discretetime readback sequence of the ith track, ri,k, can be generated from normal sampling. The discrete-time readback sequences,
ri−1,k′ , ri,k , and ri+1,k′ are then equalized by 1-D equalizers that are designed based on the minimum-mean square error
(MMSE) criterion under the monic constraint [11]. The data
sequences zi−1,k′ and zi+1,k′ are equalized according to the targets corresponding to both the upper and lower layers,
respectively, while zi,k is equalized according to the targets corresponding only to the lower layer [6]. Next, these sig-
nals are processed by maximum probability detectors using SOVAs [9] to obtain the soft-information data streams, λi−1,k′ , λi,k, and λi+1,k′ referred to as the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). These LLR values then undergo reliability enhancement for
both the upper and lower layers. Starting with the upper layer,
for instance, the LLR of the i − 1th track is enhanced by downsampling λi−1,k′ to obtain λi(−1)1,k . This sequence is then processed through the LDPC-I decoder to generate a new LLR, λ˜ i(−1)1,k, before upsampling together with another new LLR obtained from LDPC-II in the proposed MIIT operation process, λ˜ i(−2)1,k. The 1-D SOVA-I receives back the upsampled LLR, λ˜ i−1,k′ , that is, λ˜ i(−1)1,k and λ˜ i(−2)1,k are recombined as alternating data samples. This process iteratively exchanges
LLRs between the SOVA detector, MIITs, and LDPC decoder,
before the user bits are estimated as aˆi−1,k. Here, three proposed iterative systems were adopted for exchanging soft
information. This procedure is also applied to the i +1th track.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHAMETONG et al.: MUTUAL SOFT-INFORMATION IMPROVEMENT TECHNIQUES FOR LOWER LAYER PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT

3000505

To enhance the LLR of the lower layer, we suggest using the proposed MIITs as detailed in Section III.

III. PROPOSED SCHEMES

A. Mutual Soft-Information Improvement Techniques

As can be seen in Fig. 1, the soft information of the lower layer was obtained from three sources: the center detector, and two neighboring detectors, represented as λi(,2k), λi(−2)1,k, and λi(+2)1,k, respectively. These three values were obtained from the downsampling process according to their position. The three values are called mutual information values, which will be enhanced in their reliability using the MIITs. In this study, we propose two MIIT techniques: the MSI scheme and the SSI scheme. These techniques are detailed as follows.
1) MSI scheme: We consider the mutual soft information values of the lower layer and choose the most reliable value among them. For example, we consider the LLR values at the kth bit of the lower layer from the i − 1th, i th, and i +1th tracks that are represented as λi(−2)1,k, λi(,2k), and λi(+2)1,k, respectively. We can obtain the updated LLR value, denoted as λˆ (k2), using the following equation:

λˆ k(2) = max λi(−2)1,k , λi(,2k) , λi(+2)1,k

·

uˆ

(2) k

(4)

where uˆ(k2) ∈ ±1 is the estimated user bit according to the selected maximum LLR. The estimated user bit can
be decided using a threshold detector, which implies the
sign of the selected maximum LLR.
2) SSI scheme: In this scheme, we also utilize three soft information values, λi(−2)1,k , λi(,2k), and λi(+2)1,k , obtained from the lower layer. However, the updated LLR value, λˆ k(2), can be obtained from the addition of the three soft information values, instead of finding the highest one,
which can be calculated using the following equation:

λˆ k(2) = λi(−2)1,k + λi(,2k) + λi(+2)1,k .

(5)

This updated LLR value represents the confidence in the data obtained from the lower layer, providing a more reliable estimate of the LLR at the kth bit.

B. Proposed Iterative Systems based on MIITs
To improve the reliability of the lower layer’s LLRs, we also suggest using MIITs in combination with soft information exchange between the SOVA detectors, MIITs, and LDPC decoders in three different iterative systems as shown in Fig. 3. We start by considering the equalized data sequences, zi−1,k′ , zi,k, and zi+1,k′ , from the i − 1th, i th, and i + 1th tracks, respectively. These are passed through their respective 1-D SOVA detectors to produce the three LLR values of the lower layer, λi(−2)1,k , λi(,2k), and λi(+2)1,k , where λi(−2)1,k and λi(+2)1,k can be obtained through downsampling the data sequences from 1-D SOVA-I and 1-D SOVA-III, respectively, while λi(,2k) can be directly obtained from 1-D SOVA-II.
Fig. 3(a) shows the first iterative system, denoted as “Ite-I sys,” which begins by receiving LLR values from the 1-D SOVAs and passes them through LDPC decoders, resulting in LLR values, λ˜ i(−2)1,k , λ˜ i(,2k), and λ˜ i(+2)1,k . The number

Fig. 3. Structures of three iterative systems combined with MIITs. (a) Ite-I sys. (b) Ite-II sys. (c) Ite-III sys.

of inner iterations, NIN , was varied in this study. To generate the upsampled LLR sequences of the upper layer, λ˜ i−1,k′ and
λ˜ i+1,k′ , before feeding them back to their detectors, these λ˜ i(−2)1,k and λ˜ i(+2)1,k must be upsampled by recombining them as alternating data samples with λ˜ i(−1)1,k and λ˜ i(+1)1,k, respectively. Also, to achieve higher LLR values, this operation works

continuously until a specified number of global iterations,

N GB, is reached. Finally, the updated LLR of the lower layer,

λˆ k(2), can are then

be decided using decided using a

(4) and (5). The estimated user bits threshold detector, denoted as aˆi(,2k).

The second proposed iterative system, denoted as “Ite-II sys,”

is shown in Fig. 3(b). The LLR values produced by the LDPC decoders, λ˜ i(−2)1,k , λ˜ i(,2k), and λ˜ i(+2)1,k are directly sent to the MIITs to find the updated LLR of the lower layer, λˆ k(2). However, in global iterative operation, this LLR sequence is defined as λ˜ i,k and is upsampled again with λ˜ i(−1)1,k and λ˜ i(+1)1,k , to generate the upsampled LLR sequences of the upper layer, λ˜ i+1,k′ and
λ˜ i+1,k′ , respectively. Next, a threshold detector is applied to decide the estimated user bits, denoted as aˆi(,2k). Finally, the third iterative system, denoted as “Ite-III sys”, is shown in Fig. 3(c). All three LLR values of the lower layer, λi(−2)1,k, λi(,2k), and λi(+2)1,k obtained from the 1-D SOVA detectors are first sent to MIITs to find the updated LLR of the lower layer, λˆ (k2). Next, this updated LLR is passed to the LDPC decoder to produce a

new LLR value, λ˜ i,k. The λ˜ i,k must also be upsampled, as in

the second iterative system. Then, at the final global iteration, λ˜ i,k will be defined as λ˜ k(2) and the estimated user bits are decided and denoted as aˆi(,2k).

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In the proposed DLMR configuration, each layer had an AD of 2 Tb/in2, with both Tz and Tx set to 18 nm, resulting in a total AD of 4 Tb/in2 as shown in Fig. 2. The island diameter was at 10 nm throughout the system. In this study, the lengths of the 1-D target coefficient, g, and the 1-D equalizer coefficient, f, are set to 3 taps and 11 taps, respectively, where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3000505
TABLE I COEFFICIENTS OF THE 1-D TARGET AND THE 1-D EQUALIZER,
AND MSE UNDER THE SNR = 14 DB

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 61, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2025

Fig. 5. Distributions of LLRs after processing through the SSI scheme. (a) Ite-I sys. (b) Ite-II sys. (c) Ite-III sys at SNR = 13 dB.

Fig. 4. Distributions of LLRs after processing through the MSI scheme. (a) Ite-I sys. (b) Ite-II sys. (c) Ite-III sys at SNR = 13 dB.

the mean square error (MSE) is calculated from the difference between the ideal sequence and the output of the equalizer. The coefficients of the 1-D target and the 1-D equalizer, and MSE values can be summarized in Table I, which are considered under the SNR of 14 dB.
We first examine the distribution of LLRs after using two different MIITs: the MSI and SSI schemes, which are shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. Plots are shown for each of the three iterative systems, labeled as “Ite-I”, “Ite-II”, and “Ite-III.” We set NGB = 1 or 4 iterations, and NIN = 10 iterations. Correct values are shown in green and erroneous values are red. Fig. 4 implies that all three proposed iterative systems have different capabilities. It seemed that when NGB = 1, the second iterative system performed better than others, and it provided zero erroneous LLRs when NGB was increased to 4. Moreover, it is evident that the SSI scheme outperformed the MSI scheme, as illustrated in Fig. 5. The erroneous LLRs were empty when the SSI scheme was operated with NGB = 1 using the third iteration system. In contrast, the MSI scheme was unable to produce empty erroneous LLRs when NGB = 1. Furthermore, we also found that the SSI scheme together with the second or third iteration systems at NGB = 4 gave the best performance.
As mentioned before, readers H-I and H-III were moved closer together to reduce the signals from the outer tracks and increase the effectiveness of our proposed MIITs. Therefore, we examined the effect of the reader movement on the recording performance of both layers. Fig. 6 shows the SNR required to achieve a BER of 10−4 with different reader offsets. The SSI scheme operating under the third iteration system was used. The positions of the readers H-I and H-III were adjusted within a range of 0%–35% of the track pitch. H-II was placed at the

Fig. 6. Comparison of the SNR required to achieve a BER of 10−4 with different reader offsets.
center of the ith track. The numbers of iterations were NIN = 3 and NGB = 4. Here, the “Upper Layer” represents the average performance of the i −1th and i +1th tracks retrieved from the upper layer, the “Lower Layer” represents the performance of the ith tracks retrieved from the lower layer, and “Average” means the average performance of all three tracks. The average performance of the upper layer deteriorated when the reader offset was increased, causing the required SNR to increase by approximately 5 dB when the reader offset changed from 0% to 35%. In contrast, the performance of the lower layer could be improved by increasing the reader offset. For example, at a reader offset of 25%, the required SNR was reduced by approximately 12 dB when compared with a reader offset of 0%. We averaged the performance of all three tracks and found that a reader offset of 28% was the crossover point. However, we selected a reader offset of 25% as the basis for this study.
Moreover, we also consider the BER performance of both upper and lower layers as a function of the SNR when the reader offsets were set to 0% and 25%, with NIN = 3 and NGB = 4, as shown in Fig. 7. At a BER of 10−5, for the upper layer, it was observed that the SNR was reduced by approximately 1.5 dB when the readers were moved closer together. However, employing this technique can enhance the performance of the lower layer, as it demonstrates superiority when comparing the head offset at 0% and 25%, ultimately improving the average BER performance of all three tracks.
Finally, we also compared the average BER performance of single-layer BPMR systems, specifically focusing on twobit arrangement schemes: regular (SL-reg) and staggered

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHAMETONG et al.: MUTUAL SOFT-INFORMATION IMPROVEMENT TECHNIQUES FOR LOWER LAYER PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT

3000505

Fig. 7. BER performance of both upper and lower layers as a function of the SNR for reader offsets of 0% and 25%.

soft information can be obtained by oversampling the readback signals generated from the staggered bit island arrangement between the upper and lower layers. The position of each reader in the array read head was also optimized to obtain the appropriate readback signals. The proposed MIITs can work in conjunction with our three proposed iteration systems, which efficiently process the soft-information output obtained from a SOVA detector. In the iteration system, the poor soft information generated from the lower layer can be improved by exchanging soft information between SOVA, MIITs, and LDPC codes. The high reliability of soft information can be enhanced by increasing the number of global iterations. This development enhances the performance in terms of the BER of the lower layer, leading to overall improved recording performance when compared to conventional, single-layer magnetic recording systems at the same AD of 4 Tb/in2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT) under Grant N41A661187 and in part by the King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang (KMITL), Thailand.

Fig. 8. Comparison of BER performance vs. SNR for conventional singlelayer BPMR systems and double-layer BPMR systems with and without the proposed MIITs in various iterative systems.
(SL-stag). Additionally, we evaluated the BER performance of the SL-stag configuration in conjunction with our proposed MIITs processing system (SL-stag-SSI-Ite-III sys). This evaluation was conducted under the conditions of NIN = 3 and NGB = 4, with a total AD of 4 Tb/in2, as illustrated in Fig. 8. The results show that our proposed systems, which integrate the SSI scheme with the second (DL-SSI-Ite-II sys) and third iteration (DL-SSI-Ite-III sys) techniques, achieve better BER performance compared to single-layer BPMR systems. Although the DL-SSI-Ite-III sys exhibits inferior BER performance compared to the SL-stag-SSI-Ite-III sys, it still shows promise for advancing double-layer BPMR technology. Additionally, this study also utilizes a 1-D equalizer and 1-D detection for the double-layer system. However, this approach may restrict the performance of the DL-SSI-Ite-III system. Therefore, further research into 2-D and 3-D processing techniques is necessary to reduce 2-D interference and ILI effects, ultimately enhancing the efficiency of double-layer BPMR.
V. CONCLUSION
This article introduced MIITs that consist of MSI and SSI schemes. These techniques aim to enhance the recording performance of the lower layer in DLMR systems. The mutual

REFERENCES
[1] K. S. Chan et al., “Channel models and detectors for two-dimensional magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 804–811, Mar. 2010, doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2009.2035635.
[2] R. Rottmayer et al., “Heat-assisted magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2417–2421, Oct. 2006, doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2006.879572.
[3] J.-G. Zhu, X. Zhu, and Y. Tang, “Microwave assisted magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 125–131, Jan. 2008, doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2007.911031.
[4] T. R. Albrecht et al., “Bit-patterned magnetic recording: Theory, media fabrication, and recording performance,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 1–42, May 2015.
[5] S. J. Greaves and Y. Kanai, “Three dimensional magnetic recording,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Magn. Recording Conf. (TMRC), Minneapolis, MN, USA, Jul. 2023, pp. 1–2, doi: 10.1109/tmrc59626.2023.10264018.
[6] C. Buajong and C. Warisarn, “Recording media configurations for double-layered bit-patterned magnetic recording,” AIP Adv., vol. 14, no. 1, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 015133, doi: 10.1063/9.0000630.
[7] A. Khametong and C. Warisarn, “A study of iterative signal processing schemes for double-layered bit-patterned recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 1–5, Sep. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2024.3402184.
[8] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962, doi: 10.1109/TIT.1962. 1057683.
[9] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. Exhib. Commun. Technol. Beyond, vol. 3, Nov. 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[10] Z.-M. Yuan, C. L. Ong, S. H. Leong, T. Zhou, and B. Liu, “3D sensitivity function of shielded reader by reciprocity principle,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1929–1932, Jun. 2010, doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2010.2040143.
[11] J. Moon and W. Zeng, “Equalization for maximum likelihood detectors,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1083–1088, Mar. 1995.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:57:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

