IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

2261

Transactions Papers

Approaching V-BLAST Capacity With Adaptive Modulation and LDPC Encoding
Yan Zhang, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a practical implementation of

the Vertical Bell Laboratories Layered Space-Time (V-BLAST)

type system, in which the multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)

open-loop capacity can be approached with conventional scalar

coding, using adaptive modulation with appropriate channel

codes, e.g., low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and optimum

successive detection (OSD). The density evolution technique is

employed to determine the maximal achievable rate of an LDPC

code for each transmit antenna for a given channel realization

at a given signal-to-noise ratio. Numerical results will show that

the average sum rate of the adaptively modulated LDPC encoded

system is quite close to the V-BLAST capacity with both rate and

power adaptations. Considering the performance degradation

caused by error propagation due to the imperfect feedback and

relatively long decoding delay in the OSD, we use parallel inter-

ference cancellation followed by minimum mean square error

filtering in Simulation

rtehseultbsitweilrlroshrowratteha(tBaERta)rgpeetrfBoErmRaonfce10sim5 uclaantiobne.

achieved by the optimally designed LDPC codes. To simplify the

code design, we replace the LDPC codes, optimally designed for

each channel realization, with rate-compatible punctured LDPC

codes, at the cost of a slight sum rate loss. If the fading process is

nonergodic, the outage capacity corresponding to a given outage

probability is used to measure the channel performance. As an

example, we design the LDPC codes for an adaptively modulated

2 2 V-BLAST system to approach its outage capacity for a given

outage probability.

Index Terms—Adaptive modulation, low-density parity check (LDPC), multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO).

I. INTRODUCTION
I N ORDER TO attain the multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) capacity, it is necessary to signal through the channel’s eigenmodes [1] with optimal power and rate allocations across those modes. Thus, a specialized transmit structure is required to perform the eigenmode signaling. It is very challenging to incorporate the MIMO capacity-achieving transceiver structures into existing systems. Instead, a vertical
Paper approved by I. Lee, the Editor for Wireless Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received October 13, 2004; revised May 27, 2005 and May 1, 2006. This work was supported by Center for Wireless Communication, UCSD, UC Discovery program, and Intersil/Conexant
The author was with the University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0407 USA. She is now with Marvell Semiconductor, Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (e-mail: yzhang@marvell.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.906425

Bell Laboratories layered space--time (V-BLAST) type system

is more likely to be adopted in the next generation of wireless

systems, since it uses a much simpler transceiver structure with

conventional scalar coding.

In a V-BLAST [2] system, a single data stream is encoded

and demultiplexed into multiple substreams determined by the

number of transmit antennas. Each substream is then modulated

into symbols and fed to its respective antenna. The transmit

antennas operate at the same symbol rate with synchronized

symbol timing. At the receiver, each of the receive antennas

receives the signals radiated from all transmit antennas. A

successive detection technique is used to separate the signal

from each transmit antenna. Since it allocates equal power and

equal rate to every transmit antenna, the open-loop V-BLAST

scheme can only attain a fraction of the MIMO capacity [3].

To overcome this problem, rate and power adaptations at each

antenna are introduced in [4]–[6]. It has been theoretically

proven in [6] that V-BLAST with per-antenna rate control

(PARC) achieves the performance of an open-loop scheme with

space--time trellis codes [7]. The authors in [6] proposed sev-

eral schemes with rate and/or power adaptations, and obtained

the corresponding capacity results based on the assumption

that capacity-achieving channel codes are employed. They also

mentioned that there is a coding penalty , which is close to

with capacity-achieving codes and

without coding

at a bit error rate (BER) of 10 in a practical system. But

the problem they left open is how to achieve those results by

designing practical channel codes in a practical system. A

general channel coding and decoding strategy is presented in [8

] to achieve the capacity of a fading channel when the channel

information is available at both the transmitter and the receiver.

Here, we explore the use of adaptive coded modulation tech-

niques, specifically using low-density parity-check (LDPC)

codes mapped to Gray-labeled modulation constellations, to

approach the MIMO capacity.

In [9], the density evolution (DE) technique is used to an-

alyze the performance of message-passing decoders on a bi-

nary input symmetric additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)

channel, enabling the accurate determination of the noise thresh-

olds of LDPC code ensembles. The application of the concen-

tration theorem and the DE technique to determine the noise

threshold of LDPC code ensembles is simplified by the sym-

metry of the channel and the decoding algorithm. Specifically,

under appropriate symmetry conditions, it suffices to consider

the performance of the all-zeros codeword [9].

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2262

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

Our objective is to develop a similar algorithmic approach for

the analysis of LDPC component codes for this V-BLAST-type

system with adaptive modulation. However, we cannot apply the

DE technique and the concentration theorem to this scheme di-

rectly, because, in general, the equivalent binary input compo-

nent channels are not symmetric. However, as shown in [10], by

introducing independent identically distributed (i.i.d.) channel

adapters, we can force the symmetry of the equivalent binary

input component channels. Thus, the analysis and design of bi-

nary LDPC codes are greatly simplified.

Optimum successive detection (OSD) [11], parametrized by

feedforward and feedback equalization vectors, is employed to

detect the transmitted vector on a per-substream basis in our

V-BLAST-type system. In the OSD algorithm, the feedforward

vectors and feedback vectors are obtained under the assumption

that the detected symbols are error free. However, this condi-

tion is not realistic, and error propagation causes system per-

formance degradation. Further, if channel codes are used, the

decoding delay incurred by the successive detection could be in-

tolerable, even in a system with a small number of antennas and

channel codes with moderate block lengths. To overcome these

problems, we choose a more practical demodulation method

based on parallel soft interference cancellation (PIC) followed

by minimum mean square error (MMSE) linear filtering [12].

For a non-ergodic fading channel, the outage capacity, which

reflects the tradeoff between outage probability and supportable

rate, is used as an information theoretic measure. Outage ca-

pacity is appropriate if the system delay constraint is shorter

than the channel coherence time, meaning that one cannot av-

erage over the fades. This condition is true for most practical

communication systems. In this paper, we calculate the outage

capacity within the prescribed constraints on outage and power,

and design optimal LDPC codes with adaptive modulation to ap-

proach the outage capacity for a 2 2 V-BLAST-type system.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we illustrate

the successive detection used in this V-BLAST-type system

and show the ergodic capacity using OSD. In Section III, we

present the channel code design for this adaptive modulation

system, i.e., the LDPC codes designed with the DE technique,

which generates the maximal achievable rate code and the

corresponding degree distribution pair for a target BER of

10 . In Section IV, we introduce PIC followed by MMSE

filtering to reduce the decoding delay and the effect of error

propagation. In Section V, we adopt rate-compatible punctured

LDPC codes to simplify the code design. Then we compare

numerical and simulated performance results for the system

using optimally designed codes with those for the system using

punctured codes. In Section VI, we extend the discussion to a

non-ergodic fading process, and design optimal LDPC codes

with adaptive modulation to approach the outage capacity of

the system with a specific outage constraint. Conclusions are

given in Section VII.

Notation: Underscore denotes column vectors;

and

denote transpose and conjugate transpose, respectively;

denotes vector norm, while

denotes cardinality;

and denotes an

identity matrix. The subscripts

and superscripts of vectors are to be interpreted as follows:

for

Fig. 1. Adaptively modulated LDPC-encoded V-BLAST-type system.

II. OSD IN V-BLAST

To facilitate rate adaptation for each transmit antenna,

we extend the original V-BLAST structure [2] with per-an-

tenna coding, i.e., we use a distinct encoder for each transmit

antenna. As shown in Fig. 1, each substream consists of in-

dependent coded symbols ,

, each with

transmit power

, under a total power constraint

. Here, we allocate equal power to each

transmit antenna, since power adaptation improves the capacity

only slightly, at the expense of an exhaustive computer search,

if rate adaptation is already employed [6]. Furthermore, we as-

sume that each transmitted symbol is drawn from an -QAM

constellation and that different constellations can be used for

different substreams. We let be a random channel matrix

corresponding to a block fading channel. Furthermore, flat

fading is assumed; thus, the channel gain matrix is written as

... . . .

...

where is the channel gain from transmit antenna to re-

ceive antenna , for

and

. For a rich

scattering environment, the entries of are i.i.d. zero-mean

complex Gaussian random variables, each with unit variance.

We use a discrete-time baseband representation of the detec-

tion process for a single transmitted symbol vector, assuming

symbol-synchronous receiver sampling and ideal timing. By let-

ting

denote the vector of transmit symbols,

we get the corresponding received vector

(1)

where is a noise vector with i.i.d. components each having

zero mean and variance , and

is

the channel gain vector associated with transmit antenna .

A successive detector, parameterized by feedforward and

feedback equalization vectors, detects the transmitted vector on

a per-substream basis in an arbitrary, but fixed, order [11]. The

feedforward equalizers are denoted by the set of length vec-

tors

, whereas the feedback equalizers are denoted

by the sets of length vectors

.

In particular, the first symbol is detected based on

, while the th symbol ,

, is detected based on

, where denotes the estimate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG: APPROACHING V-BLAST CAPACITY WITH ADAPTIVE MODULATION AND LDPC ENCODING

2263

2 TABLE I
CAPACITIES AND MAXIMAL ACHIEVABLE RATES OF A 2 2 V-BLAST SYSTEM USING OPTIMALLY DESIGNED LDPC CODES

of . If we assume all the detected symbols are error free, then can be represented as

(2)

Optimum successive detection (OSD) [11] maximizes

the conditional mutual information between

and

, conditioned on the detected symbols

,

. Define

and

as the partial matrix of and , respectively. Using OSD, the instantaneous capacity of the th antenna is given by [11 ]

V-BLAST-type system. We cannot apply the DE technique to

this scheme directly because, for the specific Gray mapping we

are using, it is easy to see that the equivalent channels are not

symmetric. Therefore, the decoding analysis of the all-zeros

codeword alone may not suffice to predict the average decoder

behavior.

Here, we force the symmetry of the equivalent binary input

component channels by using i.i.d. channel adapters. As shown

in Fig. 1, each i.i.d. channel adapter has three modules. The

first one is a source that generates the binary symbol vector ,

, according to an i.i.d. equiprobable distribution.

The second one is a

adder:

, where

is the LDPC-coded vector. The last module is a sign ad-

juster:

, where is the a posteriori

probability (APP) module output and is the LDPC decoder

input. It is obvious that the last module undoes the effect of the

second module. Therefore, each equivalent binary input channel

,

, is transformed into a new binary input sym-

metric channel with corresponding input and output .

Conditioned on the channel gain matrix , and the

transmitted symbols ,

with

, for

, the conditional probability density function (pdf)

of ,

,

is Gaussian distributed

, where

, assuming the previously detected symbols are error free. Here,
, and is obtained as

(3)
and the corresponding ergodic capacity can be obtained by taking the expectation over .
Note that the idealized capacity results assume a code of

By averaging over pdf

(4)
, where , we get the conditional

infinite length to achieve infinitesimally small bit error rates,

whereas in an actual system, only finite length coding with

(5)

nonzero error rates are feasible. Further, the idealized results

assume a continuous rate set, but in an actual system, only rates

from a discrete rate set are feasible.

For a practical coding scheme with a nonzero target BER, the

rate of the th antenna is determined by the specific coding

method, modulation constellation and target BER. LDPC codes

are used in our scheme, in conjunction with -QAM constel-

lations. Specifically, once we obtain

from , we use a

-QAM constellation for the th substream, where

is the smallest integer greater than or equal to . Then, for a fixed

SNR level, the DE technique is used to obtain the LDPC code

with the maximal achievable rate such that the BER of the

system is below the target BER. Therefore, the rate for the th

substream is

. The ergodic capacity

where denotes the event notes the event
, and

,

de-

,

denotes

denotes the subspace

for the th substream can be obtained by averaging over

. To arrive at (5a) and (5b), the theorem of

a large number of channel realizations. The results for different total probability and the definition of conditional probability are

SNR levels are listed in Table I.

applied, respectively. Equation (5c) holds because, conditioned

III. LDPC CODE DESIGN USING DE

on the channel gain matrix , the transmitted symbols from distinct antennas are independent of each other. Therefore, the

We now describe the way in which we extend the DE joint probability

is independent

technique to this adaptively modulated LDPC-encoded of , and

can be further factored into the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2264

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

the initial density of . We also define the following events:

Fig. 2. Comparison of the actual pdf to the Gaussian approximation.

Noting that

(see Fig. 1), we obtain

product of the individual probabilities

.

(7)

The last equation (5d) follows because

,

i.e., we assume that the symbols in the chosen constellation

are equiprobably transmitted. We have observed from our

numerical calculations that

can be

approximated by a Gaussian pdf as long as the constellation size

is not greater than 16-QAM. Fig. 2 shows the actual pdf and the

Gaussian approximation, which validates our approximation.

We can explain the phenomenon as follows. In our scheme,

turns out to be 16 for most of the channel realizations,

if the SNR is not greater than 10 dB. Since the feedforward

vector is designed to suppress the interference,

,

, is much smaller than

. Thus, the

mean values for , for all

, conditioned on

, are all close

to

, so that the mixture of those Gaussian pdfs can

be approximated as another Gaussian pdf with mean value

and variance slightly larger than . For the

th substream,

is precisely a

Gaussian pdf, since no interference exists.

Note that

, as shown in Fig. 1,

is the input to the mapping device. The th component

of , for

, is the log-likelihood

probability ratio (LAPPR) of the corresponding input of the

th mapper . From the relation between and , con-

ditioned on and , we can calculate the conditional pdf

. Using the mapping relation-

ship between and ,

, where

is the

mapping function for the th antenna, we have

where

denotes the multiple summations over bi-

nary variables

,

. Equations (7a)

and (7b) are derived from the definition of and the theorem

(6) of total probability. Equation (7c) is a result of the definition of and the definition of conditional probability. Equations

(7d)–(7f) hold based on the assumptions that the coded bits in

where denotes the set of symbols of

, for which a symbol are independent, and each symbol is equiprobably

, for

.

chosen from the constellation. Generally, unlike in the BPSK

To apply the DE technique, we need , the LAPPR value of case, is no longer a Gaussian random variable. Note that the

, to be used as the decoder input of the th component code. numerator and the denominator in (6) are a mixture of a group

Denote by

the initial density of , and denote by of Gaussian pdfs. However, the mean value of , conditioned

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG: APPROACHING V-BLAST CAPACITY WITH ADAPTIVE MODULATION AND LDPC ENCODING

2265

Fig. 3. Parallel interference cancellation and MMSE filtering demapper.

on different

or

, is no longer approxi-

mately independent of the value of , and the difference is

determined by the specific mapping method and labeling. Sim-

ulation results show that

and

, regarded as func-

tions of the random variable , may have multiple maximal

values, and, therefore, they are certainly non-Gaussian. Thus

a Monte Carlo method has to be used. We first obtained the

numerical distribution of , conditioned on , and used it as

the initial density of the LAPPRs of the augmented binary input

component channel. The DE technique was then employed to

derive the maximal achievable rate and the corresponding

degree distribution pair

of the LDPC code.

IV. PIC-MMSE DEMODULATION

Define

. To estimate

transmitted symbol , a soft interference cancellation is per-

formed on the received vector , and we obtain

.

Then, an MMSE filter is applied to each to further suppress

the residual interference plus noise, i.e.,

. Here,

is chosen to minimize the mean square error between the

symbol and the filter output , and as in [12], we have

(9)

In a practical system, feedback errors cause significant system

performance degradation, since

and

are no longer the optimal vectors for maximizing the condi-

tional mutual information

when feedback

where

. Using an ap-

proximation introduced in [12], we regard as the output of

an equivalent AWGN channel with input , i.e.,

is not perfect. Another prominent disadvantage of the OSD

algorithm is the impractical decoding delay if channel codes

(10)

are used, since the feedback symbol estimates are generated by re-encoding the decoded information bits and remodulating the re-encoded bits. Even in a system with a small number of antennas and channel codes with moderate block lengths, this delay could be intolerable.

where

and is a zero-

mean Gaussian random variable with variance

. So the extrinsic information

of each coded bit,

, is given by [10]

A more practical demodulation method based on parallel soft

interference cancellation and MMSE linear filtering [12] is se-

lected to mitigate those problems. The PIC-MMSE demapper

is illustrated in Fig. 3. First, based on the a priori information

of the coded bits

,

soft estimates

, i.e.,

, we compute the where

is the set of symbols with

, and

of the transmitted vector is the set of indices within symbol such that

,

,

.

The quantity

is used by the th LDPC decoder as the

a priori information

. For the LDPC decoder, we use

the standard sum--product algorithm to generate the extrinsic

information

. In this way, the soft symbol estimates can

(8) be improved by further iterations between the demodulator and the LDPC decoder.

Finally, to speed up the convergence, we modified the ear-

where

. Since we assume the coded bits are in- lier algorithm as follows. In the first iteration, since no symbol

dependent, the symbol error probability can be factored into estimates are available if we demodulate the branches simul-

the product of the bit error probabilities, where

taneously, the th demapper cannot get any a priori informa-

, tion,

, from the LDPC decoders, so no cancellation is

[10].

done. Hence, we delay the demodulation of the th antenna for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2266

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

2 TABLE II
CAPACITIES AND MAXIMAL ACHIEVABLE RATES OF A 2 2 V-BLAST SYSTEM USING PUNCTURED LDPC CODES

Fig. 4. Comparison of the decoding convergence rate of Tx1 using modified PIC algorithm to that using the original PIC algorithm.

TABLE III DEGREE DISTRIBUTION OF A RATE-0.25 LDPC CODE

TABLE IV PUNCTURING PROPORTIONS OF RATE-COMPATIBLE PUNCTURED LDPC CODES
FROM A RATE 0.25 MOTHER CODE

Fig. 5. Comparison of the decoding convergence rate of Tx2 using modified

PIC algorithm to that using the original PIC algorithm.

in [14], so that only one mother code, with a given degree

distribution

and rate

, is used for all the

time slots, so that the symbol estimates,

,

of the tentatively demodulated symbols

can be

used as the feedback for interference cancellation. In the simu-

lations, we find that this modification enhances the convergence

significantly, as shown in Figs. 4 and 5. We can explain this

phenomenon by noting that the extrinsic information from the

channel realizations.

The basic idea of puncturing is summarized as follows.

For a given mother code, variable nodes having the same

edge degree are put into a group denoted as ,

.

We randomly puncture a proportion

of sym-

bols in , where is optimized according to the desired

th demodulator

is improved due to the interference

cancellation, which, in turn, accelerates the convergence of the

LDPC decoding. As a consequence, the extrinsic information

from the LDPC decoder

is better, and thus, helps the

demodulation during the next iteration. We found that only three

to four iterations between the demapper and the LDPC decoder

suffice to achieve the target BER of , when we use the de-

layed demodulation at the first iteration.

puncturing fraction. The expression

specifies a

puncturing distribution

. The punc-

turing fraction is defined as the ratio of the number of

punctured variable nodes to the number of variable nodes,

and is expressed as

, where

is the number of variable nodes with degree .

Hence, the code rate of a punctured LDPC code is deter-

mined by three-tuple of distributions

, i.e.,

V. RATE-COMPATIBLE PUNCTURING OF LDPC CODES

. . Based on the convergence condition using the Gaussian

To implement this adaptive scheme, we have to design approximation (GA) [13], the puncturing coefficients ’s are

for each antenna distinct LDPC codes, optimal for the cor- optimized to maximize the puncturing fraction at a fixed

responding channel realizations. Since these optimal LDPC SNR threshold. We choose the code with the lowest nonzero

codes may have different degree distributions, the transmitter rate, i.e., the code designed for the poorest channel realization,

(receiver) has to adjust the encoder (decoder) structure for each as the base code for each transmit antenna, and puncture the

channel realization. This requirement increases the complexity left degree distribution

to get the higher rate punctured

of the transceiver. To reduce the transceiver complexity, we use codes. The maximal achievable rates with the punctured LDPC

the idea of rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes proposed codes at different SNR levels for each antenna are listed in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG: APPROACHING V-BLAST CAPACITY WITH ADAPTIVE MODULATION AND LDPC ENCODING
TABLE V DEGREE DISTRIBUTION OF A RATE-0.20 LDPC CODE

2267

TABLE VI PUNCTURING PROPORTIONS OF RATE-COMPATIBLE PUNCTURED LDPC CODES
FROM A RATE 0.2 MOTHER CODE

2 Fig. 7. BER performance of a 2 2 V-BLAST system with optimally de-
signed LDPC codes and with rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes.

2 Fig. 6. Comparison of the ergodic capacity to the maximal achievable rate of
a 2 2 V-BLAST system with optimally designed LDPC codes and to that with rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes.
Table II. The computed puncturing proportions are also listed in Tables III–VI.
Comparing the numerical results in Fig. 6, we find that the maximal rates achieved by rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes are slightly worse than the maximal rates achieved by optimizing the LDPC codes for each SNR level. In the BER performance simulations, we fix the number of symbols transmitted from each antenna in each frame to be 2500, since symbol synchronization is required to implement the parallel interference cancellation. Thus, the block length of the LDPC code corresponding to each channel realization has to be adjusted due to the distinct constellation. For example, if QPSK is the chosen constellation, then the block length of the LDPC code is 5000. The same rule applies to the rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes. In the latter case, the block length of the base code has to be adjusted by the puncturing portion corresponding to each channel realization. Specifically, if QPSK is the chosen constellation and the desirable punctured code rate is 0.4, then the block length of the base code of rate 0.25, , is calculated as

where is the code block length after puncturing. To realize the symbol synchronization in the punctured code case, the block length of the base code has to vary from frame to frame to accommodate the chosen constellation and puncturing fraction for each frame. Therefore, the receiver has to be equipped with multiple decoders since the parity check matrices for different block lengths are distinct, and we cannot get the full benefits of using rate-compatible punctured codes.1
Nevertheless, the study of rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes does give us some insight into the design of rate-compatible punctured codes for the adaptively modulated systems. The BER performance of the system with the optimal LDPC codes and with rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes for each SNR level is shown in Fig. 7. Generally, the system with the optimal LDPC codes outperforms the system with the punctured LDPC codes. It is observed that the BER performances of both systems appear to degrade in the high SNR region. We offer the following as a possible explanation. The BER performance obtained by the DE technique reflects the average performance of the code ensemble. However, the performance of a bad code construction deviates from the average. As the SNR increases, the channel code rate tends to be high, which makes the performance more sensitive to the specific code construction, since it is harder to design a loop-free graph structure.

VI. OUTAGE CAPACITY AND THE OPTIMAL LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR NON-ERGODIC FADING CHANNELS

The outage capacity is defined as the maximum rate below

which arbitrarily reliable transmission is possible for a given

percentage of channel realizations. In the context of the

V-BLAST setup, the transmission rate on each of the subchan-

nels should not be greater than the respective capacities of

those subchannels, so that the assumption of perfect feedback

can be justified.

As in the ergodic fading channel case, the outage capacity

of V-BLAST can be achieved by Gaussian-distributed input

symbols [2]. This means that the th subchannel capacity is a

random variable of the form

, where is the

received SNR of the th subchannel. If the subchannels are

transmitting at rates

, the outage probability of the

V-BLAST

, is defined as

1This problem is addressed in [15]. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2268

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

[16]. The outage capacity

for

is the maximum sum rate at which arbitrarily

reliable transmissions are possible for all the subchannels for

% of the channel realizations. It is given by [16]

2 TABLE VII
OUTAGE CAPACITIES AND MAXIMAL ACHIEVABLE RATES OF A 2 2 V-BLAST SYSTEM WITH BLOCK FADING

(11)

To obtain the outage capacity within the prescribed constraints on outage and power, and to design the optimal LDPC codes with adaptive modulation to approach the outage capacity, we use a 2 2 MIMO system to illustrate the process. The achievable outage region for V-BLAST for a specific channel realization is

channel realization. Then we use the

th smallest

supportable rate as an approximation for the maximal achiev-

able sum rate, denoted by in Table VII , where and

are the corresponding rates for the two antennas for the 2 2

V-BLAST-type system using optimum successive detection.

VII. CONCLUSION (12) This paper proposes a practical scheme for a V-BLAST-type

For the designated rate pair

either

or

an indicator function

by

, an outage event occurs if . Define

system in which the MIMO open-loop capacity is approached closely by means of adaptive modulation using LDPC codes. For each transmit antenna, the constellation is chosen based upon its capacity using OSD, and the DE technique is employed

an outage event occurs otherwise

to determine the maximal achievable rate of the LDPC code in (13) each channel realization. Numerical results show that the spec-
tral efficiency of the designed system for achieving the target

For the prescribed outage constraint

, we

get the outage region by transmitting on independent

channel realizations. Specifically, we compute the achievable

outage region for each of the instances, and record the total

number of outages

for a given rate pair

.

According to the definitions of outage capacity and outage

probability, all the rate pairs

in the outage region satisfy

the condition,

, and the outage capacity is

the rate pair with the largest sum rate.

Once we have the supportable rate distribution based on

instantaneous capacity pairs,

, we can calculate the outage capacities for different

outage constraints. Specifically, if

and

%,

then 10 out of the 100 channel realizations with the lowest

sum capacity could be experiencing an outage. The lowest sum

BER is quite close to the capacity of the V-BLAST system with per-antenna rate and power adaptations. To simplify the channel code design, we replace the optimal LDPC codes with rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes for each antenna, at the expense of slightly reduced spectral efficiency. In performance simulations, we use PIC followed by MMSE filtering to overcome the problems caused by error propagation and the decoding delay in the OSD algorithm. Again, the results show that the system using the optimal codes slightly outperforms the system using the punctured codes. Further, we calculate outage capacities of this adaptively modulated V-BLAST-type system with a given outage probability for nonergodic fading channels. Then, to approach the outage capacities, we employ similar methodology to design the LDPC codes and choose the modulation alphabet for each antenna.

capacity corresponding to the remaining channel realizations

is regarded as the outage capacity for this specific outage

constraint, where the superscript “osd” stands for “optimal

successive detection.” The outage capacities for a given outage

probability at different SNR levels are listed in Table VII. Note

that

is the corresponding rate pair to achieve

Here, we use the same methodology as before to determine

the modulation size, and obtain the LDPC code with maximal

achievable rate to approach the outage capacity. For each

channel realization , the constellation is chosen by the

corresponding capacity

for each antenna. Then the

DE technique is used to obtain the maximal achievable rate

for a target BER of 10 , where

is the

index of the transmit antenna. Once we get those rate pairs

for all the channel realizations, we calculate the supportable

sum rates

,

and sort them in a non-decreasing order, where

is the modulated symbol rate of the th antenna for the th

REFERENCES
[1] E. Telatar , “Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels ,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 585–595, Nov./Dec. 1999.
[2] P. W. Wolniansky, G. J. Foschini, G. D. Golden, and R. A. Valenzuela, “V-BLAST: An architecture for realizing very high data rates over the rich-scattering wireless channel,” in Proc. IEEE ISSSE, Pisa, Italy, Sep. 1998, pp. 295–300.
[3] G. J. Foschini and M. J. Gans, “On limits of wireless communications in a fading environment when using multiple antennas,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 6, pp. 311–335, Mar. 1998.
[4] S. Catreux , P. F. Driessen, and L. J. Greenstein, “Data throughputs using multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) techniques in a noiselimited cellular environment,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 226–235, Apr. 2002.
[5] S. T Chung , A. Lozano, and H. C. Huang, “Approaching eigenmode BLAST channel capacity using V-BLAST with rate and power feedback,” in Proc. IEEE VTC, Atlantic City, NJ, Oct. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 915–919.
[6] S. T. Chung , A. Lozano, H. C. Huang, A. Sutivong, and J. M. Cioffi, “Approaching the MIMO capacity with a low-rate feedback channel in V-BLAST,” EURASIP J. Appl. Signal Process., vol. 2004, no. 5, pp. 762–771, May 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG: APPROACHING V-BLAST CAPACITY WITH ADAPTIVE MODULATION AND LDPC ENCODING

2269

[7] V. Tarokh , N. Seshadri, and A. R. Calderbank, “Space-time codes for high data rate wireless communications: Performance criterion and code construction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 744–765, Mar. 1998.
[8] A. J. Goldsmith and P. Varaiya, “Capacity of fading channels with channel side information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1986 –1992, Nov. 1997.
[9] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding ,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[10] J. Hou , P. H. Siegel, L. B. Milstein, and H. D. Pfister , “Capacityapproaching bandwidth-efficient coded modulation schemes based on low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 2141–2155, Sep. 2003.
[11] M. K. Varanasi and T. Guess, “Optimum decision feedback multiuser equalization with successive decoding achieves the total capacity of the Gaussian multiple-access channel,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Monterey, CA, Nov. 1997, pp. 1405–1409.
[12] X. Wang and H. V. Poor, “Iterative (turbo) soft interference cancellation and decoding for coded CDMA,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1046 –1061, Jul. 1999.
[13] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657 –670, Feb. 2001.

[14] J. Ha , J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[15] Y. Zhang, “Rate-compatible punctured irregular repeat-accumulate codes design,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. California, San Diego, 2005.
[16] T. Guess , H. Zhang, and T. V. Kotchiev, “The outage capacity of BLAST in MIMO channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Anchorage , AK, May 2003, vol. 4, pp. 2628–2632.
Yan Zhang (S’03) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in radio engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1996 and 1999, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California, San Diego, in 2005.
Since graduation, she has been with Marvell Semiconductor, Inc., Santa Clara, CA. Her research interests include physical-layer communication theory, multiple-antenna techniques, information theory, spread spectrum, and channel coding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

