4422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

Sufficient Conditions for Convergence of the Sum–Product Algorithm
Joris M. Mooij and Hilbert J. Kappen

Abstract—Novel conditions are derived that guarantee convergence of the Sum-Product Algorithm (also known as Loopy Belief Propagation or simply Belief Propagation (BP)) to a unique fixed point, irrespective of the initial messages, for parallel (synchronous) updates. The computational complexity of the conditions is polynomial in the number of variables. In contrast with previously existing conditions, our results are directly applicable to arbitrary factor graphs (with discrete variables) and are shown to be valid also in the case of factors containing zeros, under some additional conditions. The conditions are compared with existing ones, numerically and, if possible, analytically. For binary variables with pairwise interactions, sufficient conditions are derived that take into account local evidence (i.e., single-variable factors) and the type of pair interactions (attractive or repulsive). It is shown empirically that this bound outperforms existing bounds.
Index Terms—Contraction, convergence, factor graphs, graphical models, loopy belief propagation, marginalization, message passing, sum–product algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE Sum-Product Algorithm [2], also known as (Loopy) Belief Propagation, which we will henceforth abbreviate as BP, is a popular algorithm for approximate inference on graphical models. Applications can be found in diverse areas such as error correcting codes (iterative channel decoding algorithms for turbo codes and low-density parity-check codes [3]), combinatorial optimization (satisfiability problems such as 3-SAT and graph coloring [4]), and computer vision (stereo matching [5] and image restoration [6]). BP can be regarded as the most elementary one in a family of related algorithms, consisting of double-loop algorithms [7], GBP [8], EP [9], EC [10], the Max-Product Algorithm [11], the Survey Propagation Algorithm [4], [12], and Fractional BP [13]. A good understanding of BP may therefore be beneficial to understanding these other algorithms as well.
In practice, there are two major obstacles in the application of BP to concrete problems: i) if BP converges, it is not clear whether the results are a good approximation of the exact marginals; ii) BP does not always converge, and in these cases

gives no approximations at all. These two issues might actually be interrelated: the “folklore” is that failure of BP to converge often indicates low quality of the Bethe approximation on which it is based. This would mean that if one has to “force” BP to converge (e.g., by using damping or double-loop approaches), one may expect the results to be of low quality.
Although BP is an old algorithm that has been reinvented in many fields, a thorough theoretical understanding of the two aforementioned issues and their relation is still lacking. Significant progress has been made in recent years regarding the question under what conditions BP converges [14]–[16],1 on the uniqueness of fixed points [18], and on the accuracy of the marginals [15], but the theoretical understanding is still incomplete. For the special case of a graphical model consisting of a single loop, it has been shown that convergence rate and accuracy are indeed related [19].
In this work, we study the question of convergence of BP and derive new sufficient conditions for BP to converge to a unique fixed point. Our results are more general and in some cases stronger than previously known sufficient conditions. A part of this material has been published already in [1].
II. BACKGROUND
To introduce our notation, we give a short treatment of factorizing probability distributions, the corresponding visualizations called factor graphs, and the BP algorithm on factor graphs. For an excellent, extensive treatment of these topics we refer the reader to [2].
A. Graphical Models
Consider discrete random variables for , with taking values in . We write . We are interested
in the class of probability measures on that can be written as a product of factors (also called potentials or interactions)
(1)

Manuscript received April 23, 2005; revised July 27, 2007. The research reported here is a part of the Interactive Collaborative Information Systems (ICIS) project (supported by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs under Grant BSIK03024) and was also sponsored in part by the Dutch Technology Foundation (STW). The material in this paper was presented in part at the 21st Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI 2005) and published in the conference proceedings.
The authors are with the Department of Biophysics, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands (e-mail: j.mooij@ science.ru.nl; b.kappen@science.ru.nl).
Communicated by P. Bartlett, Associate Editor for Pattern Recognition, Statistical Learning and inference.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.909166

The factors are indexed by subsets of , i.e.,

.

If

is the subset

, we write

. Each factor is a positive

function2

. is a normalizing constant

1After submission of this work, we became aware of [17], which contains improved versions of results in [16], some of which are similar or identical to results presented here (cf. Section V-B).
2In Section IV-E, we will loosen this assumption and allow for factors containing zeros.

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOOIJ AND KAPPEN: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVERGENCE OF THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

4423

Fig. 1. Part of the factor graph illustrating the BP update rules (2) and (3).

= = The factor nodes I; J; J 2 F are drawn as rectangles, the variable nodes

2 V n f g n f g i; j; j ; j

as circles. Note that N I J; J and I i . j; j ; j

Apart from the messages that have been drawn, each edge also carries a message

flowing in the opposite direction.

where the ’s and ’s are normalization constants, chosen such that the approximate marginals are normalized in -sense. A fixed point always exists if all factors are strictly positive [8]. However, the existence of a fixed point does not necessarily imply convergence towards the fixed point, and fixed points may be unstable [25].
Note that the beliefs are invariant under rescaling of the messages

ensuring that

. The class of probability mea-

sures described by (1) contains Markov random fields as well as

Bayesian networks. We will use upper case letters for indices of

factors (

) and lower case letters for indices of

variables (

).

The factor graph that corresponds to the probability distribu-

tion (1) is a bipartite graph with vertex set

. In the factor

graph (see also Fig. 1), each variable node

is connected

with all the factors

that contain the variable, i.e., the

neighbors of are the factor nodes

.

Similarly, each factor node

is connected with all the

variable nodes

that it contains and we will simply denote

the neighbors of by

. For each variable

node , we define the set of its neighboring variable nodes

by

, i.e., is the set of indices of those

variables that interact directly with .

B. (Loopy) Belief Propagation

(Loopy) Belief Propagation (BP) is an algorithm that cal-

culates approximations to the marginals

and

of the probability measure (1). The calculation is

done by message-passing on the factor graph: each node passes

messages to its neighbors. One usually discriminates between

two types of messages: messages

from factors to

variables and messages

from variables to factors

(where

). Both messages are positive functions on

, or, equivalently, vectors in (with positive components).

The messages that are sent by a node depend on the incoming

messages; the new messages, designated by , are given in

terms of the incoming messages by the following BP update

rules3

for positive constants , which shows that the precise way of

normalization in (2) and (3) is irrelevant. For numerical sta-

bility, however, some way of normalization (not necessarily in

-sense) is desired to ensure that the messages stay in some

compact domain.

In the following, we will formulate everything in terms of the

messages

from factors to variables; the update equa-

tions are then obtained by substituting (2) in (3)

(4)

with

such that

. We consider here

BP with a parallel update scheme, which means that all message

updates (4) are done in parallel.

III. SPECIAL CASE: BINARY VARIABLES WITH PAIRWISE INTERACTIONS

In this section, we investigate the simple special case of bi-

nary variables (i.e.,

for all ), and in addition we

assume that all potentials consist of at most two variables (“pair-

wise interactions”). Although this is a special case of the more

general theory to be presented later on, we start with this simple

case because it illustrates most of the underlying ideas without

getting involved with the additional technicalities of the general

case.

We will assume that all variables are -valued, i.e.,

for all

. We take the factor index set as

with

(the “local evidence”) and

(the “pair potentials”). The probability measure

(1) can then be written as

(2)

(5)

(3) for some choice of the parameters (“couplings”) and

(“local fields”), with

for

and

Usually, one normalizes the messages in the -sense (i.e., such

that

). If all messages have converged to

some fixed point , one calculates the approximate marginals

or beliefs

for

.

Note from (4) that the messages sent from single-variable fac-

tors to variables are constant. Thus, the question whether

messages converge can be decided by studying only the mes-

sages sent from pair potentials to variables. It turns out to be

advantageous to use the following “natural” parameterization of

the messages

3We abuse notation slightly by writing X n x instead of X n fxg for sets X.

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

where

is now interpreted as a message sent from

variable to variable (instead of a message sent from the factor

to variable ). Note that in the pairwise case, the product

over

in (4) becomes trivial. Some additional elementary

algebraic manipulations show that the BP update (4) becomes

particularly simple in this parameterization and can be written

as

(7)

Let (

be a normed space. The norm induces a matrix

norm (also called operator norm) on linear mappings

, defined as follows:

The -norm on induces the following matrix norm:

where

are the variables that interact

with via a pair potential.

Defining the set of ordered pairs

, we see that the parallel BP update is a mapping

; (7) specifies the component

in terms

of the components of . Our goal is now to derive sufficient

conditions under which the mapping is a contraction. For this

we need some elementary but powerful mathematical theorems.

A. Normed Spaces, Contractions, and Bounds

In this subsection we introduce some (standard) notation and

remind the reader of some elementary but important proper-

ties of vector norms, matrix norms, contractions, and the Mean

Value Theorem in arbitrary normed vector spaces, which are the

main mathematical ingredients for our basic tool, Lemma 2. The

reader familiar with these topics can skip this subsection and

proceed directly to Lemma 2 in Section III-B.

Let

be a normed finite-dimensional real vector

space. Examples of norms that will be important later on are

the -norm on , defined by

(9)

where

with the th canonical basis vector.

The -norm on induces the following matrix norm:

(10)

In the following consequence of the well-known Mean Value

Theorem, the matrix norm of the derivative (“Jacobian”)

at

of a differentiable mapping

is used to

bound the distance of the -images of two vectors.

Lemma 1: Let

be a normed space and

a differentiable mapping. Then, for

where we wrote

for the segment

joining and .

Proof: See [20, Theorem 8.5.4].

and the -norm on , defined by

A norm on a vector space induces a metric on by the

definition

. The resulting metric space is

complete.4

Let

be a metric space. A mapping

is

called a contraction with respect to if there exists

such that

for all

(8)

In case is induced by a norm , we will call a contraction

with respect to a -contraction. If

is complete, we

can apply the following theorem, due to Banach:

B. The Basic Tool

Combining Theorem 1 and Lemma 1 immediately yields our basic tool.

Lemma 2: Let

be a normed space,

differentiable and suppose that

Then is a -contraction by Lemma 1. Hence, for any

, the sequence

converges to a unique fixed

point

with a convergence rate that is at least linear by

Theorem 1.

Theorem 1 (Contracting Mapping Principle): Let

be a contraction of a complete metric space

. Then C. Sufficient Conditions for BP to Be a Contraction

has a unique fixed point

and for any

,

the sequence

obtained by iterating con-

verges to . The rate of convergence is at least linear, since

for all

.

Proof: Can be found in many textbooks on analysis.

We apply Lemma 2 to the case at hand: the parallel BP update

mapping

, written out in components in (7).

Different choices of the vector norm on will yield different

sufficient conditions for whether iterating will converge to a

unique fixed point. We will study two examples: the norm

Note that linear convergence means that the error decreases

exponentially, indeed

for some .

4Completeness is a topological property which we will not further discuss, but we need this to apply Theorem 1.

and the norm. The derivative of
by

is easily calculated from (7) and is given (11)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOOIJ AND KAPPEN: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVERGENCE OF THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

4425

where5 (12)

(13)

Note that we have absorbed all -dependence in the factor

; the reason for this will become apparent later on.

The factor

is nonnegative and independent of

and captures the structure of the graphical model. Note that

, implying that

(14)

everywhere on . 1) Example: The -Norm: The
following condition.

-norm on

yields the

D. Beyond Norms: The Spectral Radius

Instead of pursuing a search for the optimal norm, we will

derive a criterion for convergence based on the spectral radius

of the matrix (13). The key idea is to look at several iterations

of BP at once. This will yield a significantly stronger condition

for convergence of BP to a unique fixed point.

For a square matrix , we denote by

its spectrum, i.e.,

the set of eigenvalues of . By we denote its spectral ra-

dius, which is defined as

, i.e., the largest

modulus of eigenvalues of .6

Lemma 3: Let

be a mapping, a metric on

and suppose that is a -contraction for some

. Then

has a unique fixed point and for any

, the sequence

obtained by iterating converges to .

Proof: Take any

. Consider the se-

quences obtained by iterating , starting, respectively, in

Corollary 1: For binary variables with pairwise interactions: if

(15)
BP is an -contraction and converges to a unique fixed point, irrespective of the initial messages.
Proof: Using (10), (13), and (14)

...
Each sequence converges to since fixed point . But then the sequence converge to .

is a -contraction with must

and now simply apply Lemma 2.
2) Another Example: The -Norm: Using the -norm instead, we find the following.
Corollary 2: For binary variables with pairwise interactions: if
(16)

Theorem 2: Let

be differentiable and suppose

that

, where has nonnegative entries and

is diagonal with bounded entries

. If

then for any

, the sequence

obtained

by iterating converges to a fixed point , which does not

depend on .

Proof: For a matrix , we will denote by the matrix

with entries

. For two matrices we will write

if

for all entries . Note that if

,

then

. Also note that

. Finally, if

and

, then

and

.

Using these observations and the chain rule, we have for any

and any

BP is an -contraction and converges to a unique fixed point, irrespective of the initial messages.
Proof: Similar to the proof of Corollary 1, now using (9) instead of (10):

hence,

.

By the Gel’fand spectral radius theorem

It is easy to see that condition (16) is implied by (15), but not conversely; thus, in this case the -norm yields a tighter bound than the -norm.

Choose

such that

. For some

. Hence, for all

,

Applying Lemma 2, we conclude that is an

Now apply Lemma 3.

, .
-contraction.

5For a set X, we define the indicator function 1 of X by 1 (x) = 1 if

6One should not confuse the spectral radius (A) with the spectral norm

x 2 X and 1 (x) = 0 if x 62 X.

kAk = (A A) of A, the matrix norm induced by the ` -norm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

Using (11), (12) and (13), this immediately yields the The function following.

Corollary 3: For binary variables with pairwise interactions,

BP converges to a unique fixed point, irrespective of the initial is strictly decreasing for

messages, if the spectral radius of the

-matrix

thus, defining

and symmetric around

,

(18)

is strictly smaller than .

The calculation of the spectral norm of the (sparse) matrix

can be done using standard numerical techniques in linear

algebra.

Any matrix norm of is actually an upper bound on the spec-

tral radius , since for any eigenvalue of with eigen-

vector we have

,

hence,

. This implies that no norm in Lemma 2

will result in a sharper condition than Corollary 3, hence the

title of this section.

Further, for a given matrix and some , there exists a

vector norm such that the induced matrix norm of satis-

fies

; see [21] for a constructive proof.

Thus, for given one can approximate

arbitrarily close

by induced matrix norms. This immediately gives a result on

the convergence rate of BP (in case

): for any

,

there exists a norm-induced metric such that the linear rate of

contraction of BP with respect to that metric is bounded from

above by

.

One might think that there is a shorter proof of Corollary 3: it

seems quite plausible intuitively that in general, for a continu-

ously differentiable

, iterating will converge

to a unique fixed point if

. However,

this conjecture (which has been open for a long time) has been

shown to be true in two dimensions but false in higher dimen-

sions [22].

we obtain

Now, from (7) we derive that hence where we defined

We conclude that is simply the distance between and the

interval

, i.e.,

if

if

otherwise.

Thus, the element

(for

matrix defined in Corollary 3 can be replaced by

) of the

E. Improved Bound for Strong Local Evidence

Empirically, it is known that the presence of strong local fields

(i.e., single-variable factors which are far from uniform) often

improves the convergence of BP. However, our results so far are

completely independent of the parameters

that measure

the strength of the local evidence. By proceeding more carefully

than we have done above, the results can easily be improved in

such a way that local evidence is taken into account.

Consider the quantity

defined in (12). We have bounded

this quantity by noting that

. Note that

for all BP updates (except for the first one), the argument

(the incoming messages) is in , which can be considerably

smaller than the complete vector space . Thus, after the first

BP update, we can use

which is generally smaller than

and thus gives a

tighter bound.

This trick can be repeated arbitrarily often: assume that

BP updates have been done already, which means that it suf-

fices to take the supremum of

over

. De-

fine for all

and all

(19) (20)

and define the intervals

Specifically, for which means that

we have

(21)

and

,

(22)

where we used (7) and defined the cavity field

Using (7) and (17), we obtain the following recursive relations for the intervals (where we use interval arithmetic defined in the obvious way):

(17)

(23)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOOIJ AND KAPPEN: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVERGENCE OF THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

4427

Using this recursion relation, one can calculate and define as the distance (in absolute value) of the interval to

if

if

(24)

otherwise.

Thus, by replacing the matrix in Corollary 3 by

The parallel BP update is the mapping in components in (26) and (27).
Note that the invariance of the messages amounts to invariance of the log messages tion. More formally, defining linear subspaces
for all
and their direct sum

, written out under scaling under transla-
(28)

(25)

we obtain stronger results that improve as increases.

Corollary 4: Let

. For binary variables with pairwise

interactions, BP converges to a unique fixed point, irrespective

of the initial messages, if the spectral radius of the

-ma-

trix defined in (25) (with defined in (21)–(24)) is strictly

smaller than .

the invariance amounts to the observation that

for all

Since

and are equivalent for our purposes, we want our

measures of distance in to reflect this equivalence. Therefore,

we will “divide out” the equivalence relation and work in the

quotient space , which is the topic of the next subsection.

IV. GENERAL CASE

In the general case, when the domains are arbitrarily large

(but finite), we do not know of a natural parameterization of the

messages that automatically takes care of the invariance of the

messages

under scaling (like (6) does in the binary case).

Instead of handling the scale invariance by the parameterization

and using standard norms and metrics, it seems easier to take

a simple parameterization and to change the norms and metrics

in such a way that they are insensitive to the (irrelevant) extra

degrees of freedom arising from the scale invariance. This is

actually the key insight in extending the previous results beyond

the binary case: once one sees how to do this, the rest follows in

a (more or less) straightforward way.

Another important point is to reparameterize the messages:

a natural parameterization for our analysis is now in terms of

logarithms of messages

. The BP update (4)

can be written in terms of the log-messages as

(26)

A. Quotient Spaces

Let be a finite-dimensional vector space. Let be a linear

subspace of . We can consider the quotient space

, where

. Defining

addition and scalar multiplication on the quotient space in the

natural way, the quotient space is again a vector space.7 We will

denote its elements as

. Note that the projection

is linear.

Let be any vector norm on . It induces a quotient norm

on , defined by

(29)

which is indeed a norm, as one easily checks. The quotient norm

in turn induces the quotient metric

on

. The metric space

is complete (since any finite-

dimensional normed vector space is complete).

Let

be a (possibly nonlinear) mapping with the

following symmetry:

where we dropped the normalization and defined

for all

(30)

We can then unambiguously define the quotient mapping (27)

Each log message

is a vector in the vector space

; we will use Greek letters as indices for the

components, e.g.,

with

. We will call

everything that concerns individual vector spaces

local

and define the global vector space as the direct sum of the

local vector spaces

which yields the following commutative diagram:

7Indeed, we have a null vector 0 + W , addition (v + W ) + (v + W ) :=
(v + v ) + W for v ; v 2 V , and scalar multiplication (v + W ) := (v) + W for  2 ; v 2 V .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

For a linear mapping

, condition (30) amounts to

, i.e., should leave invariant; we can then un-

ambiguously define the quotient mapping

.

If

is differentiable and satisfies (30), the sym-

metry property (30) implies that

, hence, we can

define

. The operation of taking deriva-

tives is compatible with projecting onto the quotient space. In-

deed, by using the chain rule and the identity

, one

finds that the derivative of the induced mapping

at equals the induced derivative of at

where the local quotient matrix norm of the “block” is given by (cf. (A59))
(35)
The derivative of the (unnormalized) parallel BP update (26) is easily calculated

for all

(31)

By Lemma 2, is a contraction with respect to the quotient

norm if

(36)

Using (29) and (31), this condition can be written more explicitly as

To lighten the notation, we will use Greek subscripts instead of

arguments: let correspond to , to , to , and to

; for example, we write

as . Taking the

global quotient norm (34) of (36) yields

B. Constructing a Norm on

Whereas in the binary case, each message

was param-

eterized by a single real number, the messages are now -di-

mensional vectors

(with components

indexed by

). In extending the -norm that proved to be useful in

the binary case to the more general case, we have the freedom

to choose the “local” part of the generalized -norm. Here we

show how to construct such a generalization of the -norm and

its properties; for a more detailed account of the construction,

see Appendix A.

The “global” vector space is the direct sum of the “local”

subspaces . Suppose that for each subspace , we have

a local norm

. A natural generalization of the -norm

in the binary case is the following global norm on :

(37) where

(38)

Note that

depends on via the dependence of

on (cf. (27)). We will for the moment simplify matters by

assuming that can be any vector in , and later discuss the

more careful estimate (where

)

(39)

(32)

It is easy to check that this is indeed a norm on .

Each subspace

has a one-dimensional subspace

defined in (28) and the local norm on

induces a local quo-

tient norm on the quotient space

. The global norm

(32) on induces a global quotient norm on , which is

simply the sum of the local quotient norms (cf. (A57))

Defining the matrix by the expression on the right-hand side (RHS) and using (35) and (29), we obtain

(33) (40)

Let

. The derivative

of

at is a linear

mapping

satisfying

. It projects

down to a linear mapping

. The matrix

norm of

induced by the quotient norm (33) is given by (cf.

(A58)):

(34)

for

and

such that

and

.

Surprisingly, it turns out that we can calculate (40) analytically

if we take all local norms to be norms. We have also tried

the norm and the norm as local norms, but were unable

to calculate expression (40) analytically in these cases. Numer-

ical calculations turned out to be difficult because of the nested

suprema.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOOIJ AND KAPPEN: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVERGENCE OF THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

4429

C. Local Norms

Take for each local norm

the norm on

. The local subspace

is spanned by the vector

. The local quotient norm of a vector

is thus given by

= Fig. 2. Part of the factor graph relevant in expressions (45), (46), and (47). Here
2 6 2 n i; j I with i j, and J N I.

(41)

For a linear mapping

that satisfies

, the induced quotient matrix norm (35) is

given by

Applying Lemma 2 now yields that is a contraction with re-

spect to the quotient norm on

if the RHS is strictly smaller

than .

Consider the mapping

that maps to the nor-

malized

, i.e., such that

for all compo-

nents

. If we take for the -normalized BP update (in

the log-domain), the following diagram commutes:

(42)

Fixing for the moment

and

(such that

and

) and dropping the superscripts from the notation,

using (42), we can write (40) as

Since both and are continuous, we can translate convergence results for back to similar results for . Thus, we have proved the following theorem.
Theorem 3: If

(46)

Interchanging the two suprema, fixing (for the moment) and

, defining

, and

,

noting that we can assume (without loss of generality) that

is normalized in sense, the previous expression (apart from

the

) simplifies to

(43)

BP converges to a unique fixed point irrespective of the initial messages.
Now we can also generalize Corollary 3. Theorem 4: If the spectral radius of the matrix
(47)

In Appendix B we show that this equals

We conclude that if we take all local norms to be the

then

equals

is strictly smaller than , BP converges to a unique fixed point irrespective of the initial messages.
Proof: Similar to the binary pairwise case; see Theorem 10 (44) in Appendix A for details.

norms,

Note that Theorem 3 is a trivial consequence of Theorem 4, since the -norm is an upper bound on the spectral radius. However, to prove the latter, it seems that we have to go through all the work (and some more) needed to prove the former.

(45)

which is defined for

with

and where

is

shorthand for

; see Fig. 2 for

an illustration.

Now combining (37), (39), and (45), we finally obtain

D. Special Cases
In this subsection, we study the implications for two special cases, namely, factor graphs that contain no cycles and the case of pairwise interactions.
1) Trees: Theorem 4 gives us a proof of the well-known fact that BP converges on trees (whereas Theorem 3 is not strong enough to prove that result).

Corollary 5: If the factor graph is a tree, BP converges to a unique fixed point irrespective of the initial messages.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

generality, since the single-variable factors that contain one or

more zeros can simply be absorbed into multivariable factors

involving the same variable. Additionally, for each

con-

sisting of more than one variable, assume that

Fig. 3. Part of the factor graph in the pairwise case relevant in (48) and (49).
Here k 2 @i and j 2 @i n k.

Proof: The spectral radius of (47) is easily shown to be zero in this special case, for any choice of the potentials.

2) Pairwise Interactions: We formulate Theorems 3 and 4

for the special case of pairwise interactions (which corresponds

to taking on only one value), i.e., all factors consists of either

one or two variables. For a pair potential

, expression

(45) simplifies to (see also Fig. 3)

(51)
These conditions guarantee that strictly positive messages remain strictly positive under the update (4), as one easily checks, implying that we can still use the logarithmic parameterization of the messages and that the derivative (36) is still well defined.
The expression for the potential strength (45) can be written in a way that is also well defined if the potential contains zeros

(48)

(52)

Note that this quantity is invariant to “reallocation” of

single-variable factors or to the pairwise factor

(i.e.,

).

can be regarded as a

measure of the strength of the potential .

The -norm based condition (46) can be written in the pair-

wise case as

(49)

which is defined for

with

and where

is

shorthand for

.

The immediate generalization of Corollary 4 is then as

follows.

Theorem 5: Under the assumptions on the potentials described above (strict positivity of single-variable factors and (51) for the other factors): if the spectral radius of the matrix

The matrix defined in (47), relevant for the spectral radius con-

dition, can be replaced by the following

-matrix in the

pairwise case:

(50)

For the binary case, we again obtain our earlier results, since .

E. Factors Containing Zeros
Until now, we have assumed that all factors are strictly positive. In many interesting applications of BP, this assumption is violated: the factors may contain zeros. It is thus interesting to see if and how our results can be extended towards this more general case.
The easiest way to extend the results is by assuming that—although the factors may contain zeros—the messages are guaranteed to remain strictly positive (i.e., the log messages remain finite) after each update.8 Even more general extensions with milder conditions may exist, but we believe that considerably more work would be required to overcome the technical problems that arise due to messages containing zeros.
Assume that each factor is a nonnegative function

(53)

(with

defined in (52)) is strictly smaller than ,

BP converges to a unique fixed point irrespective of the initial

messages.

Proof: Similar to the strictly positive case. The only slight

subtlety occurs in Appendix B where one has to take a limit of

strictly positive factors converging to the desired nonnegative

factor and use the continuity of the relevant expressions with

respect to the factor entries to prove that the bound also holds in

this limit.

1) Example: Define, for

, the (“ferromagnetic”) pair-

wise factor by the following matrix:

Now consider a binary pairwise factor graph, consisting of a

single loop of binary variables, i.e., the network topology is

that of a circle. Take for the

pair interactions

(for

) the identity matrices (i.e., the above pair

factors for ) and take for the remaining one

for some . Note that the potential strength

converges to as . The spectral radius of the corresponding

matrix

can be shown to be equal to

In addition, assume that all factors involving only a single vari-

able are strictly positive. This can be assumed without loss of which is strictly smaller than if and only if

. Hence,

8Additionally, the initial messages are required to be strictly positive, but this BP converges to a unique fixed point if

. This result is

requirement is easily met and is necessary for obtaining good BP results.

sharp, since for , BP simply “rotates” the messages around

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOOIJ AND KAPPEN: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVERGENCE OF THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

4431

without changing them and hence no convergence occurs (ex-

cept, obviously, if the initial messages already correspond to the

fixed point of uniform messages).

with

V. COMPARISON WITH OTHER WORK

In this section, we explore the relations of our results with previously existing work.

A. Comparison With Work of Tatikonda and Jordan

In [14], [15], a connection is made between two seemingly

different topics, namely, the Sum-Product Algorithm on the one

hand and the theory of Gibbs measures [23] on the other hand.

The main result of [14] states that BP converges uniformly (to a

unique fixed point) if the Gibbs measure on the corresponding

computation tree9 is unique.

This is a remarkable and beautiful result; however, the ques-

tion of convergence of BP is replaced by the question of unique-

ness of the Gibbs measure, which is not trivial. Fortunately, suf-

ficient conditions for the uniqueness of the Gibbs measure exist;

the most well known are Dobrushin’s condition and a weaker

(but more easily verifiable) condition known as Simon’s con-

dition. In combination with the main result of [14], they yield

directly testable sufficient conditions for convergence of BP to

a unique fixed point. For reference, we will state both results in

our notation below. For details, see [14], [15], and [23]. Note

that the results are valid for the case of positive factors con-

sisting of at most two variables.

1) BP Convergence Via Dobrushin’s Condition: Define Do-

brushin’s interdependence matrix as the

matrix with

entries

for

and otherwise.

(54)

Theorem 6: For pairwise (positive) factors, BP converges to a unique fixed point if

Proof: For a proof sketch, see [15]. For the proof of Dobrushin’s condition see [23, Ch. 8].
We can rewrite the conditional probabilities in terms of factors

2) BP Convergence Via Simon’s Condition: Simon’s condition is a sufficient condition for Dobrushin’s condition (see [23, Proposition 8.8]). This leads to a looser, but more easily verifiable, bound:
Theorem 7: For pairwise (positive) factors, BP converges to a unique fixed point if
It is not difficult to show that this bound is weaker than (49). Furthermore, unlike Dobrushin’s condition and Corollary 4, it does not take into account single-variable factors.
B. Comparison With Work of Ihler et al.
In the recent and independent work [16] of Ihler et al., a methodology was used which is very similar to the one used in this work. In particular, the same local quotient metric is used to derive sufficient conditions for BP to be a contraction. In the work presented here, the Mean Value Theorem (in the form of Lemma 1) is used in combination with a bound on the derivative in order to obtain a bound on the convergence rate in (8). In contrast, in [16], a direct bound on the distance of two outgoing messages is derived in terms of the distance of two different products of incoming messages [16, eq. (13)]. This bound becomes relatively stronger as the distance of the products of incoming messages increases. This has the advantage that it can lead to stronger conclusions about the effect of finite message perturbations than would be possible with our bound, based on the Mean Value Theorem. However, for the question of convergence, the relevant limit turns out to be that of infinitesimal message perturbations, i.e., it suffices to study the derivative of the BP updates as we have done here.
In the limit of infinitesimal message perturbations, the fundamental bound [16, eq. (13)] leads to the following measure of potential strength:

Note that the complexity of the calculation of this quantity is

generally exponential in the size of the neighborhood , which may prohibit practical application of Dobrushin’s condition.
For the case of binary -valued variables, some elementary algebraic manipulations yield

Using this measure, Ihler et al. derive two different conditions

for convergence of BP. The first one is similar to our (49) and

the second condition is equivalent to our spectral radius result

(50), except that in both conditions,

is used instead of

. The latter condition is formulated in [16] in terms of the

convergence properties of an iterative BP-like algorithm. The

9The computation tree is an “unwrapping” of the factor graph with respect to
BP; specifically, the computation tree starting at variable i 2 V consists of all
paths starting at i that never backtrack.

equivalence of this formulation with a formulation in terms of

the spectral radius of a matrix can be seen from the fact that for

any square matrix ,

if and only if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

. However, our result also gives a contraction rate, unlike the

iterative formulation in [16].

Thus, the results in [16] are similar to ours in the pairwise

case, except for the occurrence of

instead of

. It

is not difficult to see that

for any pair factor

; indeed, for any choice of

local fields). Then we study nonuniform couplings , in the absence of local fields. Finally, we take fully random models in various parameter regimes (weak/strong local fields, strong/ weak ferromagnetic/spin-glass/antiferromagnetic couplings).
A. Uniform Couplings, Uniform Local Field

The fully connected Ising model consisting of binary

-valued variables with uniform couplings and uniform

local field is special in the sense that an exact description

Thus, the convergence results in [16] are similar to, but weaker

than the results derived in the present work.

After initial submission of this work, [17] was published,

which improves upon [16] by exploiting the freedom of choice

of the single-variable factors (which can be “absorbed” to an

arbitrary amount by corresponding pair factors). This leads to

an improved measure of potential strength, which turns out to

be identical to our measure

. Thus, for pairwise, strictly

positive potentials, the results in [17] are equivalent to the results

(49) and (50) presented here. Our most general results, Theo-

rems 3–5 and Corollary 4, are not present in [17].

of the parameter region for which the Gibbs measure on the

computation tree is unique, is available. Using the results of

Tatikonda and Jordan, this yields a strong bound on the pa-

rameter region for which BP converges to a unique fixed point.

Indeed, the corresponding computation tree is a uniform Ising

model on a Cayley tree of degree

, for which (semi-)

analytical expressions for the paramagnetic–ferromagnetic and

paramagnetic–antiferromagnetic phase transition boundaries

are known (see [23, Sec. 12.2]). Since the Gibbs measure

is known to be unique in the paramagnetic phase, this gives

an exact description of the

region for which the Gibbs

measure on the computation tree is unique, and hence a bound

C. Comparison With Work of Heskes

A completely different methodology to obtain sufficient con-

ditions for the uniqueness of the BP fixed point is used in [18].

By studying the Bethe free energy and exploiting the relation-

ship between properties of the Bethe free energy and the BP

algorithm, conclusions are drawn about the uniqueness of the

BP fixed point; however, whether uniqueness of the fixed point

also implies convergence of BP seems to be an open question.

We state the main result of [18] in our notation below.

The following measure of potential strength is used in [18].

For

, let

on BP convergence on the original model.

In Fig. 4, we have plotted various bounds on BP convergence

in the

plane for

(other values of yield quali-

tatively similar results). The gray area (g) marks regions where

the Gibbs measure on the computation tree is not unique; in the

white area, the Gibbs measure is unique and hence BP is guar-

anteed to converge. Note that this bound is only available due

to the high symmetry of the model. In [24], it is shown that par-

allel BP does not converge in the lower (antiferromagnetic) gray

region. In the upper (ferromagnetic) region, on the other hand,

parallel BP does converge, but it may be that the fixed point is

no longer unique.

The various lines correspond to different sufficient condi-

tions for BP convergence; the regions enclosed by two lines

of the same type (i.e., the inner regions for which is small)

mark the regions of guaranteed convergence. The lightly dotted

lines (a) correspond to Heskes’ condition, Theorem 8. The dash-

The potential strength is then defined as

.

Theorem 8: BP has a unique fixed point if there exists an

“allocation matrix” between factors

and variables

such that

1)

, for all

;

2)

, for all

;

3)

, for all .

dotted lines (b) correspond to Simon’s condition, Theorem 7.

The dashed lines (d) correspond to Dobrushin’s condition (The-

orem 6), which is seen to improve upon Simon’s condition for

, but is nowhere sharp. The solid lines (c) correspond to

the spectral radius condition Corollary 3 (which coincides with

the -norm based condition Corollary 2 in this case and is also

equivalent to the result of [16]), which is independent of but

is actually sharp for

. The heavily dotted lines (e) corre-

Proof: See [18, Theorem 8.1].
The (non)existence of such a matrix can be determined using standard linear programming techniques.

spond to Corollary 4 with

, the -shaped lines (f) to the

same corollary with

. Both e and f are seen to coincide

with c for small , but improve for large .

We conclude that the presence of local fields makes it more

difficult to obtain sharp bounds on BP convergence; only Do-

VI. NUMERICAL COMPARISON OF VARIOUS BOUNDS

brushin’s condition (Theorem 6) and Corollary 4 take into account local fields. Furthermore, in this case, our result (Corol-

In this section, we compare various bounds on binary pair- lary 4) is stronger than the other bounds. Note that the calcula-

wise graphical models, defined in (5), for various choices of tion of Dobrushin’s condition is exponential in the number of

the parameters. First we study the case of a completely uniform variables , whereas the time complexity of our bound is poly-

model (i.e., full connectivity, uniform couplings, and uniform nomial in . Similar results are obtained for higher values of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOOIJ AND KAPPEN: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVERGENCE OF THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

4433

= Fig. 4. Comparison of various BP convergence bounds for the fully connected N 4 binary Ising model with uniform coupling J and uniform local field .
a: Heskes’ condition, b: Simon’s condition, c: spectral radius condition, d: Dobrushin’s condition, e: improved spectral radius condition for m = 1, f: improved spectral radius condition for m = 5, g: uniqueness of Gibbs’ measure condition. See the main text (Section VI-A) for more explanation.

B. Nonuniform Couplings, Zero Local Fields

C. Fully Random Models

We have investigated in more detail the influence of the dis-

tribution of the couplings , in the absence of local fields, and

have also compared with the empirical convergence behavior

of BP. We have taken a binary Ising model on a rectangular

toroidal grid (i.e., with periodic boundary conditions) of size

. The couplings were random independent normally

distributed nearest neighbor couplings

, the

local fields were

. Let

be the polar coordinates

corresponding to the Cartesian coordinates

. For various

angles

, we have determined the critical radius for

each bound. The results have been averaged over 40 instances

of the model and can be found in Fig. 5. The lines correspond to

the mean bounds, the gray areas are “error bars” of one standard

deviation. The inner area (for which the couplings are small)

bounded by each line means “convergence”, either guaranteed

or empirical (thus the larger the enclosed area, the tighter the

bound). From bottom to top: the thin solid line (a) corresponds

to Heskes’ result (Theorem 8 ), the dash-dotted line (b) to Do-

brushin’s condition (Theorem 6 ), the dotted line (c) corresponds

toh the -norm based condition Corollary 2, the dashed line (d)

to the spectral radius condition Corollary 3, and the thick solid

line (e) to the empirical convergence behavior of BP.

We conclude from Fig. 5 that the spectral radius condition im-

proves upon the -norm based condition for nonuniform cou-

plings and that the improvement can be quite substantial. For

Finally, we have considered fully connected binary pairwise

graphical models with completely random couplings and local

fields (in various parameter regimes). We drew random cou-

plings and local fields as follows: first, we drew independent and

identically distributed (i.i.d.) random parameters

from a normal distribution with mean and variance . Then,

for each variable , we independently drew a local field param-

eter

, and for each pair

we independently

drew a coupling parameter

.

For the resulting graphical model, we have verified whether

various sufficient conditions for BP convergence hold. If con-

dition holds whereas condition does not hold, we say that

wins from . We have counted for each ordered pair

of conditions how often wins from . The results (for 50 000

random models consisting of

variables) can be found

in Table I: the number at row , column is the number of

trials for which bound wins from bound . On the diagonal

(

) is the total number of trials for which bound pre-

dicts convergence. Theorem 6 is due to [15], Corollary 3 was

first published (for the binary case) in [16] and Theorem 8 is

due to [18].

Our result Corollary 4 (for

) outperforms the other

bounds in each trial. For other values of , we obtain similar

results.

VII. DISCUSSION

uniform couplings (and zero local fields), both conditions coin- In this paper, we have derived sufficient conditions for conver-

cide and it can be proved that they are sharp [25].

gence of BP to a unique fixed point. Our conditions are directly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

2  N Fig. 5. Comparison of various bounds for BP convergence for toroidal Ising model of size 10 10 with normally distributed couplings J

(J ;  ) and

zero local fields. a: Heskes’ condition, b: Dobrushin’s condition, c: ` -norm condition, d: spectral radius condition, e: empirical convergence boundary. See the

main text (Section VI-B) for more explanation.

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF BOUNDS (50 000 TRIALS, FOR N = 4 AND N = 8)

(Corollary 4). In the general case, such an improvement is possible in principle but seems to be more involved. The resulting

optimization problem (essentially (43) with additional assump-

tions on ) looks difficult in general. If the variables’ cardi-

nalities and connectivities are small, the resulting optimization

problem can be solved, but writing down a general solution does

not appear to be trivial. The question of finding an efficient so-

lution in the general case is left for future investigation.

The work reported here raises new questions, some of which

have been (partially) answered elsewhere after the initial sub-

mission of this paper. The influence of damping the BP update

equations has been considered for the binary pairwise case in

[25], where it was shown that damping has the most effect for

applicable to arbitrary graphical models with discrete variables and nonnegative factors. This is in contrast with the sufficient conditions of Tatikonda and Jordan and with the results of Ihler, Fisher, and Willsky, which were only formulated for pairwise, positive factors. We have shown cases where our results are stronger than previously known sufficient conditions.
Our numerical experiments lead us to conjecture that Corollary 4 is stronger than the other bounds. We have no proof for

antiferromagnetic interactions. Furthermore, it has been proved in [25] that the bounds for BP convergence derived in the present work are sharp in the case of binary variables with (anti-) ferromagnetic pairwise interactions and zero local fields, as suggested by Fig. 5. An extension of the results towards sequential update schemes has been given in [26]. Likewise, in [24] it is shown that Dobrushin’s condition is also valid for sequential BP.

this conjecture at the moment, apart from the obvious fact that

Corollary 3 is weaker than Corollary 4. To prove that Corollary 4

is stronger than Theorem 6 seems subtle, since it is generally not

the case that

, although it seems that the weaker

relation

does hold in general. The

relation with the condition in Theorem 8 is not evident as well.

Let and let

APPENDIX A GENERALIZING THE -NORM
be a finite collection of normed vector spaces be the direct sum of the ’s. The function
defined by

In the binary pairwise case, it turned out to be possible to derive sufficient conditions that take into account local evidence

(A55)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOOIJ AND KAPPEN: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVERGENCE OF THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

4435

is a norm on , as one easily checks. Let

be a linear

Corollary 6: The matrix norm of

mapping with “blocks”

defined by

induced by the quotient norm on

is

(A58)

for all .
Theorem 9: The matrix norm of norm is given by

where induced by the vector

(A59)

where

(A56) Proof: We can directly apply the previous theorem to the
quotient spaces to obtain (A58); because

Proof: Let

such that

. Then

we have:

Now let

such that

convex combination

Hence

. Then can be written as the , where

For a linear matrix with entries linear mappings; then

if

if

.

such that

, we define the

. Let be two such

hence,

. Note that

generalize Theorem 2 as follows.

. We can

It is evident that this value is also achieved for some

with

.

An illustrative example is obtained by considering

to be the direct sum of copies of with the absolute value

as norm; then the norm (A55) on is simply the -norm and

the induced matrix norm (A56) reduces to (9).

Suppose that each has a linear subspace . We can con-

sider the quotient spaces

with quotient norms . The

direct sum

is itself a subspace of , yielding a

quotient space . For

we have

and hence

. The quotient norm on

is simply the

sum of the quotient norms on the

Theorem 10: Let

be differentiable and suppose

that it satisfies (30). Suppose further that

for some

matrix (which does not depend on ) with

. Then

for any

, the sequence

obtained by

iterating converges to a unique fixed point .

Proof: Using the chain rule, we have for any

and any

(A57) By the Gel’fand Spectral Radius Theorem,

Let

be a linear mapping such that

Then induces a linear

; since

for .,

. Choose

such that . Hence,

. For some for

, each block

induces a linear

all

. By Lemma 2, is a contraction with respect to

, and can be regarded as consisting of the blocks . the quotient norm on . Now apply Lemma 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4436
APPENDIX B PROOF THAT (43) EQUALS (44) Let be a matrix of positive numbers. Let

Define the function

by

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007
are suboptimal, since the two contributions in the sum over in have opposite sign. Hence

Lemma 4: Let

. Then

Theorem 11:

Proof: Elementary. The easiest way to see this is to repa-

rameterize

with

.

Proof: First note that we can assume without loss of generality that all are different, because of continuity. Define

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Martijn Leisink for stimulating discussions and the reviewers for their critique, which has led to a considerable improvement of the initial version of the manuscript.

For

, define

REFERENCES

which is evidently a closed convex set. The function

obtained by restricting to is convex. Hence, it achieves its maximum on an extremal point of its domain.
Define

as those

with exactly two nonzero components. For

, define

and

. Because of continuity, we can restrict

ourselves to the

, in which case the extremal points of

are precisely

(i.e., the extremal points have

exactly two nonzero components).

Now

For those

with components with different , we can

use the lemma below. The

with components with equal

[1] J. M. Mooij and H. J. Kappen, “Sufficient conditions for convergence of loopy belief propagation,” in Proc. 21st Annu. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-05), F. Bacchus and T. Jaakkola, Eds., Corvallis, OR, 2005, pp. 396–403.
[2] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum–product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[3] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s ’belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[4] A. Braunstein and R. Zecchina, “Survey propagation as local equilibrium equations,” J. Statist. Mech.: Theory and Experiment, vol. 2004, no. 6, p. P06007, 2004 [Online]. Available: http://stacks.iop.org/17425468/2004/P06007
[5] J. Sun, N.-N. Zheng, and H.-Y. Shum, “Stereo matching using belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 787–800, Jul. 2003.
[6] K. Tanaka, “Statistical-mechanical approach to image processing,” J. Phys. A: Mathematical and General, vol. 35, no. 37, pp. R81–R150, 2002 [Online]. Available: http://stacks.iop.org/0305-4470/35/R81
[7] T. Heskes, C. A. Albers, and H. J. Kappen, “Approximate inference and constrained optimization,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-03), San Francisco, CA, 2003, pp. 313–320.
[8] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, Jul. 2005.
[9] T. Minka, “Expectation propagation for approximate Bayesian inference,” in Proc. 17th Annu. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-01), San Francisco, CA, 2001, pp. 362–369.
[10] M. Opper and O. Winter, “Expectation consistent approximate inference,” J. Machine Learning Res., vol. 6, pp. 2177–2204, Dec. 2005.
[11] Y. Weiss and W. T. Freeman, “On the optimality of solutions of the max-product belief propagation algorithm in arbitrary graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 736–744, Feb. 2001.
[12] A. Braunstein, M. Mézard, and R. Zecchina, “Survey propagation: An algorithm for satisfiability,” Random Structures and Algorithms, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 201–226, 2005.
[13] W. Wiegerinck and T. Heskes, “Fractional belief propagation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, S. T. S. Becker and K. Obermayer, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003, vol. 15, pp. 438–445.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOOIJ AND KAPPEN: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVERGENCE OF THE SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

4437

[14] S. C. Tatikonda and M. I. Jordan, “Loopy belief propagation and Gibbs measures,” in Proc. 18th Annu. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-02), San Francisco, CA, 2002, pp. 493–500.
[15] S. C. Tatikonda, “Convergence of the sum–product algorithm,” in Proc. 2003 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Paris, France, Apr. 2003, pp. 222–225.
[16] A. T. Ihler, J. W. Fisher, and A. S. Willsky, “Message errors in belief propagation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 17 (NIPS*2004), L. K. Saul, Y. Weiss, and L. Bottou, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005, pp. 609–616.
[17] A. T. Ihler, J. W. Fisher, and A. S. Willsky, “Loopy belief propagation: Convergence and effects of message errors,” J. Machine Learning Res., vol. 6, pp. 905–936, 2005.
[18] T. Heskes, “On the uniqueness of loopy belief propagation fixed points,” Neur. Comput., vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 2379–2413, Nov. 2004.
[19] Y. Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neur. Comput., vol. 12, pp. 1–41, 2000.
[20] J. Dieudonné, Foundations of Modern Analysis. New York: Academic, 1969, vol. 10-I, Pure and Applied Mathematics.

[21] E. Deutsch, “On matrix norms and logarithmic norms,” Numer. Mathematik, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 49–51, Feb. 1975.
[22] A. Cima, A. van der Essen, A. Gasull, E. Hubbers, and F. Manosas, “A polynomial counterexample to the Markus-Yamabe conjecture,” Adv. Math., vol. 131, no. 2, pp. 453–457, Nov. 1997.
[23] H.-O. Georgii, Gibbs Measures and Phase Transitions. Berlin, Germany: Walter de Gruyter, 1988.
[24] N. Taga and S. Mase, “On the convergence of loopy belief propagation algorithm for different update rules,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals, vol. E89-A, no. 2, pp. 575–582, Feb. 2006.
[25] J. M. Mooij and H. J. Kappen, “On the properties of the Bethe approximation and loopy belief propagation on binary networks,” J. Statist. Mech.: Theory and Experiment, vol. 2005, no. 11, p. P11012, 2005 [Online]. Available: http://stacks.iop.org/1742-5468/2005/P11012
[26] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in Proc. 22nd Annu. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-06), Boston, MA, Jul. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

