IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

4117

Area-Efficient Min-Sum Decoder Design for High-Rate Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes in Magnetic Recording
Hao Zhong1, Wei Xu2, Ningde Xie2, and Tong Zhang2
LSI Corporation, San Jose, CA 95134 USA Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA
We report a silicon area efficient method for designing a quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) code decoder. Our design method is geared to magnetic recording that demands high code rate and very high decoding throughput under stringent silicon cost constraints. The key to designing the decoder is to transform the conventional formulation of the min-sum decoding algorithm in such a way that we can readily develop a hardware architecture with several desirable features: 1) silicon area saving potential inherent in the min-sum algorithm for high-rate codes can be fully exploited; 2) the decoder circuit critical path may be greatly reduced; and 3) check node processing and variable node processing can operate concurrently. For the purpose of demonstration, we designed applicationspecific integrated circuit decoders for four rate-8/9 regular-(4, 36) QC-LDPC codes that contain 512-byte, 1024-byte, 2048-byte, and 4096-byte user data per codeword, respectively. Synthesis results show that our design method can meet the beyond-2 Gb/s throughput requirement in future magnetic recording at minimal silicon area cost.
Index Terms—Decoder, low-density parity-check (LDPC), min-sum algorithm, very large scale integration (VLSI).

I. INTRODUCTION
DUE to their excellent error correcting capability with relatively low-complexity iterative decoding algorithms, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have recently attracted much attention for their applications in magnetic recording systems. To be adopted by real-life hard disk drives, LDPC codes must not only achieve very low sector failure rate with high code rate (e.g., 8/9 and higher), but also be suitable for high-speed (e.g., 2 Gb/s and higher) very large scale integration (VLSI) implementation at minimal silicon area cost. Such stringent requirements make appropriate LDPC code construction a nontrivial task. Prior work has well demonstrated that quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes, one special family of LDPC codes, are a promising candidate in this context. From the error-correcting performance perspective, researchers [1]–[3] have recently implemented high-speed dedicated hardware simulators using field programmable gate array (FPGA) devices to empirically demonstrate the significant coding gain of high-rate QC-LDPC codes over current practice at sector failure rates as low as 10 –10 . Meanwhile, the inherent structural regularity of QC-LDPC codes makes it relatively easy to design efficient partially parallel decoder architectures, as demonstrated by the large amount of work recently reported, e.g., see [4]–[11]. Partially parallel decoders map a certain number of variable nodes or check nodes to a single hardware unit in a time-division multiplexed mode subject to desirable tradeoffs between silicon area and decoding throughput.
However, the silicon cost of high-speed decoder implementation still remains a big concern for using QC-LDPC codes in magnetic recording. This is mainly because of the long sector length in hard disk drives, e.g., in most current hard disk drives each sector contains 512-byte user data and recently the International Disk Drive, Equipment, and Materials Association

(IDEMA) announced a recommendation to make one sector

contain 4096-byte user data. Generally, the longer sector size

enables the use of longer error correction code (ECC) that can

achieve the desired level of sector failure rate at less coding re-

dundancy (or higher code rate). However, as the penalty, longer

ECC tends to incur higher decoder implementation silicon cost,

particularly when targeting on very high decoding throughput.

This is particularly serious for LDPC codes since the amount of

decoding messages to be stored (and hence the silicon cost for

data storage) is proportional to the codeword length. This work

concerns the development of QC-LDPC code decoder design

solutions to push the silicon area efficiency envelope under the

following magnetic-recording-oriented constraints: 1) code rate

is 8/9 and higher; 2) user data per codeword may range from

512 bytes up to 4096 bytes; and 3) the decoder can achieve be-

yond-2 Gb/s throughput with a reasonable number of decoding

iterations (e.g., 16 iterations). To the best of our knowledge,

in spite of the large amount of recent work on LDPC decoder

design, very few results are readily available on decoders sat-

isfying the above constraints, particularly for very long LDPC

codes such as 4096-byte user data per codeword that remains

almost completely unexplored in the open literature.

This paper presents a silicon area efficient QC-LDPC

code decoder design solution geared to the above mag-

netic-recording-oriented constraints and demonstrates its

practical potential through application-specific integrated cir-

cuit (ASIC) design at 65-nm CMOS technology node. It is

well-known that various LDPC decoding algorithms may fall

into three categories, including sum-product algorithm (SPA)

[12], min-sum algorithm [13], and layered decoding algorithm1

[4], [9]. This work focuses on the min-sum algorithm because

its check node processing approximation may potentially lead

to significant silicon area savings from two perspectives: 1)

the logic complexity may be reduced due to the elimination of

the function

that is typically implemented as

lookup table (LUT) in hardware and 2) more importantly, the

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2007.906890

1We categorize turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm in [4] as layered decoding following the notation in [9].

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

size of memory for decoding message storage may be reduced The main difference between SPA and min-sum algorithm

due to the possible compact representation of check-to-variable lies in the check node processing, i.e., the check node processing

messages. However, this memory saving potential has not in SPA is realized as

been fully exploited by existing high-speed partially parallel

min-sum decoders [5], [6], although such potential has been

pointed out in some serial min-sum decoding schemes [14],

[15]. Moreover, for partially parallel decoder design, the conventional min-sum algorithm formulation results in explicit implementation of a sorter in each check node processing unit, which will make the potential of logic silicon area saving

(1)

where

. The check node processing

in min-sum algorithm is approximated as

quickly diminish and result in an essential speed bottleneck as

(2)

the code rate (or, more specifically, the row weight of parity

check matrix) increases. In this work, we developed a decoder design solution to fully
exploit the potential advantages of min-sum decoding algorithm, particularly under the above magnetic-recording-oriented constraints. We transform (or reformulate) the conventional

Therefore, the function , which is typically implemented as LUTs in hardware, is eliminated in the min-sum algorithm. The conventional min-sum algorithm formulation is described as follows.

min-sum algorithm formulation in such a way that it becomes relatively straightforward to develop a high-speed partially par- Algorithm 1: Min-Sum Decoding Algorithm

allel decoder architecture with the following favorable features, including: 1) the silicon area saving potential inherent in the min-sum algorithm for high-rate codes can be fully exploited;

Initialization:

for

to

; or convergence to codeword do

2) the decoder circuit critical path may be greatly reduced; and 3) check node processing and variable node processing can operate concurrently. To demonstrate the effectiveness of this

forall check nodes

do ;

proposed design solution for magnetic recording, we designed

;

decoders for four rate-8/9 regular-(4, 36) QC-LDPC codes

that contain 512-byte, 1024-byte, 2048-byte, and 4096-byte

end

user data per codeword, respectively. We note that QC-LDPC codes with column weight of 4 are used because prior work [1], [2], [16] showed that such codes may be much more immune

forall variable nodes

do ;

to error floor than the codes with column weight of 3. All

;

these decoders are designed using Synopsys tools and 65-nm

CMOS technology libraries. When the decoding messages are

end

quantized using 4 bits, these decoders can achieve 2.1-Gb/s decoding throughput (with 16 decoding iterations) while occupying silicon areas of only 1.92 mm , 2.32 mm , 2.81 mm ,

end Output the decoded bits as sign

and 3.78 mm , respectively. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II presents the proposed min-sum algorithm transformation. Section III presents the developed partially parallel decoder architecture. The decoder ASIC design results are given in Section IV, and Section V draws the conclusion.

Due to the check node processing approximation, the check-to-variable messages from each check node only have two different magnitudes (i.e., the minimum and the second minimum ones among the magnitudes of all the variable-to-check messages entering into this check node), no matter how large the check node degree is. Meanwhile, the

II. PROPOSED MIN-SUM ALGORITHM TRANSFORMATION

check node processing approximation eliminates the function . Intuitively, these two features may be leveraged to

This section presents the proposed transformation of reduce the storage and logic silicon area. However, a direct

min-sum algorithm formulation. First, we introduce some realization of partially parallel decoders based on the above

conventional definitions and notations following the open conventional min-sum algorithm formulation, e.g., the existing

literature. Given an

parity check matrix , we partially parallel min-sum decoders [5], [6], may not be able

define the set of bits that participate in parity check as to effectively materialize such silicon area saving potential for

, and the set of parity checks in two main reasons.

which bit participates as

. We 1) In spite of much less check-to-variable messages storage

denote the set

with bit excluded by

, and

requirement, the total number of distinct variable-to-check

the set

with check excluded by

. The

messages always equals to the total number of 1s in the parity

channel message, variable-to-check message, check-to-variable

check matrix. A direct realization of partially parallel de-

message, and posterior log-likelihood ration (LLR) are denoted

coders may have to provide explicit storage for these vari-

as

, and , respectively, where the superscript

able-to-check messages, leading to the same (or similar)

is iteration index.

storage requirement as in its SPA decoder counterpart.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG et al.: AREA-EFFICIENT MIN-SUM DECODER DESIGN FOR HIGH-RATE QC-LDPC CODES

4119

2) The direct realization of partially parallel decoders tends to

implement parallel-input parallel-output check node pro-

cessing units that use a sorter to search the two minimum

ones among all the incoming variable-to-check messages.

As code rate increases, the silicon area overhead incurred

by sorters will quickly increase.

To tackle the above two issues, we propose a transformed

min-sum algorithm described in Algorithm 2. Although it is

mathematically equivalent to the original min-sum algorithm,

its formulation and execution order make it straightforward

to realize silicon area savings at VLSI architecture level. In

particular, this algorithm transformation has two key features,

including: 1) the check node processing and variable node pro-

cessing are interleaved in such a way that each newly updated

variable-to-check message may be directly absorbed by check

node processing units without being intermediately stored

and 2) the check node processing is sequentialized so that the

explicit implementation of a sorter is eliminated. To generate

the outgoing check-to-variable messages from each check node

(i.e.,

), the sequentialized check node

processing only needs to keep track of the two minimum mag-

nitudes, i.e.,

and

where

,

among the input variable-to-check messages, the sign of

each input variable-to-check message and

, and

the variable node index representing which variable node

provides the message with the minimum magnitude.

Fig. 1. Graph representation of QC-LDPC codes.

Algorithm 2: Transformed Min-Sum Algorithm

for

to or convergence to codeword do

forall variable nodes

do

if

then

;

else

Fig. 2. Decoding scheduling within one decoding iteration.

otherwise

; end

end Initialize forall check nodes
if

; ;
do then

end

;

;

end

;

end

end

Output the decoded bits as sign

;

Additionally, we note that the min-sum algorithm is gener-

;

ally less sensitive to quantization errors compared to SPA and

hence may enable the use of smaller finite word-length. For ex-

;

ample, it has been shown in [13] that a 4-bit quantization of de-

else

coding messages may be sufficient to avoid error floor, although it may result in about 0.2 dB performance loss compared to 6-bit

if

then

quantization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

s m s Fig. 3. Proposed partially parallel decoder architecture that contains VNUs and 1 SCNUs.

III. PARTIALLY PARALLEL DECODER ARCHITECTURE

This section presents the developed partially parallel

QC-LDPC decoder architecture based on the above trans-

formed min-sum algorithm formulation. The parity check

matrix of a QC-LDPC code consists of an

array of

square circulant matrices.2 Hence, the

parity check matrix can be represented by a bipartite graph

as shown in Fig. 1, where each group of consecutive rows

(or columns) are represented by a set of check (or variable)

nodes. Notice that the cyclic permutation blocks in Fig. 1

realize message passing between adjacent variable and check

node groups through simple cyclic permutations based on the

quasi-cyclic parity check matrix structure.

Fig. 4. Structure of one serial check node processing unit (SCNU).

A. Decoding Scheduling

In the developed partially parallel QC-LDPC decoder, the de-

coding scheduling within each decoding iteration directly fol-

lows the above transformed formulation. This can be illustrated

in Fig. 2 and explained as follows. One out of the total vari-

able node sets is processed at one time, and all the check nodes Fig. 5. Structure of one variable node processing unit (VNU). are processed in a serial manner interleaved with the variable

node processing. In Fig. 2(a), the first set of variable nodes is processed and feeds variable-to-check messages to all the check B. Decoder Architecture

nodes for partial check node processing. Then the decoding moves to the second step as shown in Fig. 2(b), where the second set of variable nodes is processed and feeds variable-to-check messages to all the check nodes for further partial check node processing. Once all the variable nodes are processed within present iteration, as shown in Fig. 2(c), all the check nodes also receive all the input variable-to-check messages and finish the check node processing for present iteration. Then all the check-to-variable messages will be fed to the variable nodes for the next iteration. Fig. 2 clearly illustrates the two desirable features of this proposed min-sum algorithm transformation, i.e., the obviation of explicit storage of variable-to-check decoding messages and concurrent operation of check node processing and variable node processing.

Let the QC-LDPC code parity check matrix be

and define a decoder parallelism factor for partially parallel

decoder design. Without the loss of generality, we assume is

divisible by and denote

. Fig. 3 shows the principal

architecture of our developed partially parallel decoder based

on the proposed min-sum algorithm transformation. Given the

decoder parallelism factor , the decoder contains variable

node processing units (VNUs) and

serial check node pro-

cessing units (SCNUs). The channel messages are stored in the

channel message SRAM blocks (CMMB). Since all the vari-

able-to-check messages are immediately absorbed by the con-

current check node processing as described in Section III-A, the

decoder only stores the check-to-variable messages in the mes-

sage storage block.

2A circulant matrix is such a matrix in which each row is obtained by cyclicly

The operation of the decoder is described as follows. All the

shifting the row above by one position.

VNUs perform the computation for consecutive variable nodes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHONG et al.: AREA-EFFICIENT MIN-SUM DECODER DESIGN FOR HIGH-RATE QC-LDPC CODES
TABLE I DECODER DESIGN RESULTS FOR THE FOUR RATE-8/9 REGULAR-(4, 36) QC-LDPC CODES

4121

TABLE II COMPARISON WITH REPRESENTATIVE RECENT WORK ON LDPC CODE PARTIALLY PARALLEL DECODER DESIGN

in each clock cycle, hence each set of variable nodes as illus- SCNU receives one variable-to-check message at a time and ac-

trated in Fig. 2 is processed with consecutive clock cycles. cordingly updates the check-to-variable messages (i.e., sifts the

Therefore, the decoder finishes one round of variable node pro- two minimum magnitudes of incoming variable-to-check mes-

cessing with clock cycles. Upon receiving the variable-to- sages) in serial, while each VNU receives all the check-vari-

check messages from variable nodes, the SCNUs partially up- able messages and generate the corresponding variable-to-check

date the decoding messages of the check nodes connected with messages at once.

those variable nodes. Each group of SCNUs are responsible

to one set of check nodes out of the total sets. Once a

time, each SCNU receives one incoming variable-to-check mes-

sage and accordingly updates the intermediate decoding data

(as defined in Section II). As shown

in Fig. 3, one group of SCNUs associates with one check-to-

variable message storage block, each block contains one SRAM

and two register arrays. In the run time, register array A stores

the intermediate decoding data

that

are being updated by the SCNUs. Every

clock cycles, the

data set

in the register array A are

completely updated and then are copied to the register array B

that provides the input to all the VNUs as shown in Fig. 3. The

SRAM stores the signs of incoming variable-to-check messages

(i.e., all the as defined in Section II) that will be used to

generate check-to-variable messages. Since the decoding data-

path is naturally pipelined due to the use of two register arrays,

all the VNUs and SCNUs can work concurrently and one de-

coding iteration takes

clock cycles. The access control

for the data storage/retrieval to/from the SRAMs and register

arrays can be readily derived based on the cyclic structure of

the parity check matrix. Let

denote the clock frequency

of the decoder and denote the number of decoding iterations,

the decoding throughput can be estimated as

IV. ASIC DESIGN RESULTS

This section presents ASIC decoder design results to demon-

strate the effectiveness of the proposed decoder design solution

and evaluate the tradeoffs between the codeword length and sil-

icon area cost. Prior work [1], [2], [16] demonstrated that reg-

ular QC-LDPC codes with column weight of 4 may be much

less subject to error floor and be good candidates for magnetic

recording. Therefore, this work focused on rate-8/9 regular-(4,

36) QC-LDPC codes whose parity check matrices are

and each circulant matrix has column weight of 1. Taking

the circulant matrix size as 128, 256, 512, and 1024, we con-

structed four QC-LDPC codes that contain 512-byte, 1024-byte,

2048-byte, and 4096-byte user data per codeword, respectively.

We set the decoder parallelism factor as 128, hence each de-

coder contains four SCNU groups, each group has 128 SCNUs,

and one group of 128 VNUs. According to (3), the decoding

throughput of these decoders is

under 16 itera-

tions. We designed these decoders using 65-nm CMOS tech-

nology and Synopsys tools for simulation, synthesis, verifica-

tion, and static timing analysis. All the decoders quantize the

channel messages and decoding messages to be 4-bit. Let de-

note the amount of user data in the code. Table I summarizes

the ASIC design results. We note that the listed silicon area for

Register Array and SRAM also includes the cost of the access

controllers that control the data storage/retrieval. (3) Table II further shows the comparison with representative

recent work on LDPC code partially parallel decoder design. The structures of each SCNU and VNU can be straightfor- For the first order approximation, when being compared against

wardly derived from the the above algorithm and architecture with decoders at 65-nm node, the areas of the decoders at 180,

descriptions, as shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. We use 160, and 130 nm listed in the table may roughly scale down by

to denote the finite word-length of each decoding message. Each 8, 6, and 4, respectively. Considering the code length, decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

throughput (normalized with respect to the decoding iterations), and silicon area, this comparison further justifies the silicon area efficiency advantage of the proposed design solution.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, by appropriately transforming the conventional min-sum algorithm formulation, we develop an area efficient QC-LDPC code decoder design solution. It is particularly suitable for magnetic recording that demands long codeword length, high code rate, and very high decoding throughput. The decoder silicon cost for data storage is reduced by obviating the explicit storage of variable-to-check messages and storing the check-tovariable messages in a compact manner. The logic complexity reduction is achieved by obviating the explicit implementation of the resource-consuming data sorters in check node processing units. Furthermore, the decoder enables concurrent operation of variable node processing and check node processing, leading to further decoding throughput improvement. Its effectiveness has been demonstrated using ASIC decoder design at 65-nm CMOS technology with the configurations geared to magnetic recording.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Sun, H. Song, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and Z. Keirn, “Field-programmable gate-array-based investigation of the error floor of low-density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2983–2985, Oct. 2005.
[2] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “High-rate quasi-cyclic {LDPC} codes for magnetic recording channel with low error floor,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2006, pp. 3546–3549.
[3] X. Hu, B. V. K. V. Kumar, L. Sun, and J. Xie, “Decoding behavior study of LDPC codes under a realistic magnetic recording channel model,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2606–2608, Oct. 2006.

[4] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[5] H. Liu et al., “A 480 Mb/s LDPC-COFDM-based UWB baseband transceiver,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), Feb. 2005, pp. 444–609.
[6] C. Lin, K. Lin, H. Chan, and C. Lee, “A 3.33 Gb/s (1200, 720) low-density parity check code decoder,” in Proc. 31st Eur. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Sep. 2005, pp. 211–214.
[7] S. Kang and I. Park, “Loosely coupled memory-based decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conf. (CICC), Sep. 2005, pp. 703–706.
[8] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[9] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SIPS), Mar. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[10] J. K.-S. Lee, B. Lee, J. Thorpe, K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Hamkins, “A scalable architecture of a structured LDPC decoder,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Jul. 2004, p. 293.
[11] Z. Wang and Q. Jia, “Low complexity, high speed decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2005, vol. 6, pp. 5786–5789.
[12] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[13] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[14] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, and J. L. Danger, “-Min decoding algorithm
of regular and irregular codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Sep. 2003. [15] Z. Wu and G. Burd, “Equation based LDPC decoder for intersymbol interference channels,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP’05), Mar. 2005, vol. 5, pp. 757–760. [16] L. Sun, H. Song, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Error floor investigation and girth optimization for certain types of low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Mar. 2005, pp. 1101–1104.
Manuscript received March 3, 2007; revised August 17, 2007. Corresponding author: T. Zhang (e-mail: tzhang@ecse.rpi.edu).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

