IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

4113

Use of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Dominant Error Events Detection and -Constraint Enforcement
Fei Sun1 and Tong Zhang2
Marvell Semiconductor, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA
In this paper, we propose to leverage the simple and explicit parity checks inherent in low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes to detect dominant error events without code rate penalty. This is enabled by enforcing a very weak constraint on the LDPC code parity check matrix structure. Such a constraint can be readily satisfied by most structured LDPC codes reported in the open literature, such as quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes. Moreover, this zero-redundancy dominant error events detection can be extended to handle the bit errors that occur when deliberate bit-flipping is used to enforce -constraints. We have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed method in computer simulations.
Index Terms—Dominant error events, -constraint, low-density parity-check (LDPC).

I. INTRODUCTION
I T is well known that, besides error correcting codes (ECC), modern magnetic recording systems typically use two other types of codes, including parity codes and modulation codes, to improve the overall system performance. Parity codes are used to detect the dominant error events at the output of trellis detectors, and once the parity constraints are violated, error event correlations are invoked to locate the most likely dominant error event. The effectiveness of such post-detection processing has been well demonstrated in the open literature [1]–[3]. Modulation codes are used to enforce certain modulation constraints on the bit stream to be stored. The most widely used modulation constraint is the run-length limited (RLL) -constraint [4], [5]. The -constraint demands that at most consecutive 0’s may appear in the bit stream, which is essential to facilitate the timing recovery. Such constraints are typically enforced by using standard RLL codes. Since both parity codes and RLL codes inevitably incur code rate penalty, tradeoffs between their powerfulness and code rate penalty must be carefully evaluated in practical system design.
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have recently attracted much attention (e.g., see [6]–[9], etc.) because of their potential applications in magnetic recording systems due to their great promise of delivering stronger error correction capabilities over Reed–Solomon codes. This work concerns the realization of dominant error events detection and -constraint enforcement for magnetic recording systems using LDPC codes. Since LDPC code decoders demand soft input, soft-output trellis detectors should be used in this context. Well-known soft-output trellis detection algorithms include the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [10] and soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) [11] and their variants. Irrelevant to which soft-output detection algorithm is being used, we still can use standard parity codes to detect dominant
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2007.907329
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

error events on the hard decisions of the trellis detection soft output. Once the parity constraints are violated, we may use the standard error correlations to locate the most likely dominant error event and erase the corresponding soft output (i.e., set their magnitudes to zero). Clearly, the code rate penalty still exists. In this work, we propose to use the simple parity checks inherent in LDPC codes to detect the dominant error events without code rate penalty. This is enabled by enforcing a very weak constraint on the LDPC code parity check matrix structure. Such a constraint can be easily satisfied by most structured LDPC codes ever studied in the open literature, such as quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes, a family of LDPC codes that have been most widely studied and shown great promise from both error correction performance and efficient very large-scale integration (VLSI) implementation perspectives [12]–[14].
The enforcement of -constraint tends to be nontrivial since RLL code decoders typically appear before ECC decoders and only generate hard output. To tackle this issue, researchers have recently developed different approaches that may fall into two categories based on whether RLL codes are explicitly used: 1) RLL codes are still explicitly used and their concatenation with ECC codes that demand soft input are enabled through reverse concatenation and/or soft RLL code decoding [7], [15]–[17]; 2) Instead of using RLL codes, the -constraint is enforced through deliberate bit-flipping [18]–[20]. This work is interested in the second category above. In this context, although code rate penalty is eliminated, the deliberate bit errors may greatly degrade the system performance. Therefore, the critical issue is how to most effectively correct those deliberate bit errors. In [18] and [20], the correction of such deliberate bit errors solely depends on ECC, while in [19] deliberate bit errors are handled jointly by post-detection processing and ECC. In this work, motivated by the basic idea in [19], we enhance the above proposed zero-redundancy dominant error events detection scheme to further handle those deliberate bit errors. Notice that in [19] an error-detection code for dominant error event detection explicitly concatenates with the conventional RS code, while in this work we propose to use the parity check constraints inherent in LDPC code structure to perform error event detection.
Based on the above discussion, we may conclude that the key features of this work include: 1) we propose to leverage the

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

structured LDPC codes that have been studied in the open literature. For example, for QC-LDPC codes that are of the most interest to magnetic recording, its parity check matrix has the following form:

H Fig. 1. Structure of the row-wise sub-matrix that contains a set of nonover-
lapped all-1’s sub-vectors spanning over all the columns.

...

parity checks inherent in LDPC codes to realize dominant error where each sub-matrix events detection without code rate penalty and 2) we further wise sub-matrix enhance the zero-redundancy dominant error events detection

is a circulant.1 If there exist a row-

scheme to detect deliberate bit errors inserted for -constraint

enforcement. For the purpose of evaluation, we considered a magnetic recording read channel that uses SOVA soft-output

...

trellis detection and a length-8136 rate-8/9 regular-(4, 36)

QC-LDPC code. Simulation results successfully demonstrate

the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

in which each column has a single 1, then it is guaranteed that the

entire code parity check matrix can be permuted to the desired

II. PROPOSED DESIGN METHODS
To detect the dominant error events at the output of trellis detectors, appropriate single or multiple parity codes with short codeword length (e.g., 64 bits) must be formed along the bit stream. In current practice, this is realized by explicitly inserting parity bits into the bit stream, which directly results in code rate penalty. Hence, the error detection mechanism being used must

structure described above. During the practical operation, when one parity constraint is
violated at the output of trellis detectors, error event correlations will be carried out to search the most likely dominant error event among a prespecified list of dominant error events while assuming a single dominant error event occurs. The most likely dominant error event is defined as

be carefully determined subject to the tradeoff between its pow-

erfulness and the code rate penalty. Since an LDPC code can

(1)

be considered as a subcode of a set of very short (e.g., 36 bits)

single parity codes, it is reasonable to expect that we may ar-

range the LDPC code encoding in such a way that a subset of

its very short single parity supercodes will explicitly and con-

secutively appear in each LDPC codeword. Intuitively, this can

be directly leveraged to realize the dominant error events de-

tection. Such an arrangement will exist as long as the LDPC

code parity check matrix has the following property: The code

parity check matrix can always be permuted through column and

row permutations so that it contains a row-wise sub-matrix (i.e.,

this sub-matrix has the same number of columns as the code

parity check matrix itself) in which each row contains an all-1’s

sub-vector and all these sub-vectors are nonoverlapped and span

over all the columns. This can be further described as follows:

for the code parity check matrix , there exists a column/row

permutation so that

, where the

row-wise sub-matrix has the structure as shown in Fig. 1.

We note that the remaining entries in this row-wise sub-matrix

must be zero (i.e., those in the grayed region in Fig. 1) are all

zeros.

If we use for the LDPC code encoding and suppose the

sub-matrix has rows, the bits in each LDPC codeword

explicitly form consecutive single parity codewords. These

explicit single parity constraints can be used to detect the domi-

nant error events. If multiple parity codes are required to detect

the dominant error events, we may interleave multiple single

parity codes together, which nevertheless will increase the parity

where is the prespecified list of dominant error events, is

the hard decision of trellis detector output,

denotes

the parity check result,

denotes the magnetic recording

channel function, and is the hard decision of trellis detector

input. Readers are referred to [1] and [2] for a detailed descrip-

tion on the realization of error event correlations. Once the most

likely dominant error event is identified, we simply set the mag-

nitudes of the corresponding soft output to zero. The prespeci-

fied list of dominant error events is typically determined based

on extensive computer simulations.

In the above, we presented the idea of using LDPC codes

to realize dominant error events detection. Following the same

principle proposed in [19], we may further use such inherent

error detection capability to support zero-redundancy -con-

straint enforcement based on deliberate bit-flipping. This leads

to an overall system structure as shown in Fig. 2. Deliberate

bit-flipping inserts a single 1 or multiple-bit vector that are de-

tectable by the post-detection processing into the bit stream

to enforce the -constraint. The post-detection processing per-

forms parity check, error event correlations, and soft output era-

sure. Once the parity constraint is violated, we first search all

the possible occurrences of deliberate bit-flipping. If only one

is found, we consider the deliberate bit-flipping as one possible

error event and add an all-0 entry into the dominant error events

list, otherwise we assume the deliberate bit-flipping does not

codeword length. The above constraint on LDPC code parity 1A circulant is a square matrix in which each row is the cyclic shift of the row check matrices is very weak and can be readily met by most above it, and the first row is the cyclic shift of the last row.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN AND ZHANG: USE OF LDPC CODES FOR DOMINANT ERROR EVENTS DETECTION

4115

Fig. 2. Overall system structure that uses parity checks inherent in LDPC codes for dominant error detection and k-constraint enforcement.

Fig. 3. Overall operation flow of the post-detection processing.

occur and keep the original list of dominant error events. The standard error event correlations and soft-output erasure are subsequently carried out based on present dominant error events list. Fig. 3 illustrates the operation flow of the proposed post-detection processing.

Fig. 4. Performance comparisons of SOVA-LDPC read channel with and without post-detection processing (without considering k-constraint
enforcement).

III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

We carried out simulations to evaluate the performance

of the above proposed methods. A length-8136 rate-8/9 reg-

ular-(4, 36) QC-LDPC code is used. Its parity check matrix

contains a 4 36 array of circulant matrices, and each circu-

lant matrix has a column weight of 1. Each circulant matrix

is randomly constructed subject to the constraint that the

overall parity check matrix is 4-cycle free. The read channel

equalization target is set as

,

and the channel is modeled as this ideal equalized channel

concatenated with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN).

Our computer simulations show that the error events with 1-bit

and 3-bit errors account for over 60% among all the error events. Hence, we simply use the 36-bit single parity check in the LDPC code for dominant error events detection. During

Fig. 5. Performance comparisons of SOVA-LDPC read channel with k-constraint enforcement.

the simulation, there is no iterations between the detector and

LDPC code decoder, and LDPC code decoder performs up to greatly degrade as reduces if we use deliberate bit-flipping

20 internal decoding iterations. Fig. 4 shows the simulation for -constraint enforcement without any compensation, while

results if we only consider the dominant error events detection. such performance degradation may reduce once we utilize the

For the purpose of comparison, we also show the simulation error event detection capability inherent in LDPC codes. The

performance when no post-detection processing is being used. above simulation results show that the proposed methods may

A gain of 0.1 dB at the LDPC code decoder output bit error rate effectively realize dominant error event detection and support

(BER) of 10 is observed.

the use of deliberate bit-flipping for -constraint enforcement

Fig. 5 shows the simulation results if we further take into ac- at no code rate penalty.

count the -constraint enforcement. In this context, we consider

the scenarios with

and

. For the purpose of compar-

IV. CONCLUSION

ison, we also carried out simulations when deliberate bit-flip- This paper showed the feasibility and potential of using the

ping is used to enforce -constraint without using parity check simple and explicit parity checks inherent in LDPC codes to re-

for error detection. As shown in Fig. 5, more than 0.2 dB gain alize dominant error events detection at no cost of code rate.

can be achieved at LDPC code decoder output BER of 10 for Moreover, we pointed out that such zero-redundancy dominant

, and the gain increases to over 0.4 dB by reducing from error events detection scheme can be readily used to reduce the

9 to 8. This is intuitively justifiable since the performance can performance degradation incurred by deliberate bit-flipping for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

-constraint enforcement. Using a test vehicle of a magnetic recording channel with the equalization target of
and a length-8136 rate-8/9 regular-(4, 36) QC-LDPC code, we carried out simulations to demonstrate the promising potential of the proposed methods.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Conway, “A new target response with parity coding for high density magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 2382–2386, Jul. 1998.
[2] W. Feng, A. Vityaev, G. Burd, and N. Nazari, “On the performance of parity codes in magnetic recording systems,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2000, pp. 1877–1881.
[3] Z. A. Keirn, V. Y. Krachkovsky, E. F. Haratsch, and H. Burger, “Use of redundant bits for magnetic recording: Single-parity codes and ReedSolomon error-correcting code,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 225–230, Jan. 2004.
[4] B. Marcus, “Sofic systems and encoding data,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-31, no. 3, pp. 366–377, May 1985.
[5] B. H. Marcus, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Finite-state modulation codes for data storage,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 5–37, Jan. 1992.
[6] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Capacity-approaching codes: Can they be applied to the magnetic recording channel?,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 122–130, Feb. 2004.
[7] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Concatenating a structured LDPC code and a constrained code to preserve soft-decoding, structure, and burst correction,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2558–2560, Oct. 2006.
[8] E. M. Kurtas, A. V. Kuznetsov, and I. Djurdjevic, “System perspectives for the application of structured LDPC codes to data storage devices,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 200–207, Feb. 2006.
[9] X. Hu and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Evaluation of low-density paritycheck codes on perpendicular magnetic recording model,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 727–732, Feb. 2007.

[10] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[11] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[12] L. Sun, H. Song, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and Z. Keirn, “Field-programmable gate-array-based investigation of the error floor of low-density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2983–2985, Oct. 2005.
[13] H. Zhong, T. Zhang, and E. F. Haratsch, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the magnetic recording channel: Code design and VLSI implementation,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1118–1123, Mar. 2007.
[14] X. Hu, B. V. K. V. Kumar, L. Sun, and J. Xie, “Decoding behavior study of LDPC codes under a realistic magnetic recording channel model,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2606–2608, Oct. 2006.
[15] J. L. Fan and J. M. Cioffi, “Constrained coding techniques for soft iterative decoders,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 1999, pp. 723–727.
[16] K. Anim-Appiah and S. W. McLaughlin, “Turbo codes cascaded with high-rate block codes for (0, k)-constrained channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 677–685, Apr. 2001.
[17] L. Reggiani and G. Tartara, “On reverse concatenation and soft decoding algorithms for PRML magnetic recording channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 612–618, Apr. 2001.
[18] B. Vasic and K. Pedagani, “Run-length-limited low-density parity check codes based on deliberate error insertion,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 1738–1743, May 2004.
[19] J. Park and J. Moon, “Imposing a k-constraint in recording systems employing post-viterbi error correction,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2995–2997, Oct. 2005.
[20] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Low-density parity-check codes with run length limited (RLL) constraints,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 344–349, Feb. 2006.
Manuscript received March 31, 2007; revised August 25, 2007. Corresponding author: T. Zhang (e-mail: tzhang@ecse.rpi.edu).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

