IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2007

2381

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

New Constructions of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Based on Special Classes of BIBDs for the AWGN and Binary
Erasure Channels
Lan Lan, Ying Yu Tai, Shu Lin, Behshad Memari, and Bahram Honary
Abstract—This paper presents new methods for efficiently constructing encodable quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes based on special balanced incomplete block designs (BIBDs). Codes constructed perform well over both the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and binary erasure channels with iterative decoding.
L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, and S. Lin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California–Davis, Davis, CA 95616 USA.
B. Memar and B. Honary are with the Department of Communication Engineering, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YW, U.K.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.910579
A Unified Approach to the Performance Analysis of Speed-Estimation Techniques in Mobile Communication
Ali Abdi, Hong Zhang, and Cihan Tepedelenlioglu
Abstract—The estimation of the mobile speed, or equivalently, the maximum Doppler frequency, is of importance in a variety of applications in wireless mobile communications. In this paper, a unified framework for the performance analysis of several major speed-estimation techniques is presented, which allows a fair comparison between all the methods, analytically. Interestingly, it is proved that all these methods are equivalent, asymptotically, i.e., for large observation intervals. In addition, we have derived closed-form expressions for the bias and variance of a recently proposed covariance-based method. We have also introduced a new estimator that relies on the average number of maxima of the inphase component, and have calculated its variance, analytically. Our extensive performance analysis, supported by Monte Carlo simulations, have revealed that depending on the channel condition and the observation interval, one needs to use a crossing- or a covariance-based technique, to achieve the desired estimation accuracy over a large range of mobile speeds.
A. Abdi is with the Center for Wireless Communications and Signal Processing Research (CWCSPR), Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102 USA.
H. Zhang is with the InterDigital Communications Corporation, King of Prussia, PA 19406 USA.
C. Tepedelenlioglu is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-3804 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.910580
Two Algorithms for Constructing Efficient Huffman-Code-Based Reversible Variable Length Codes
Chia-Wei Lin, Ja-Ling Wu, and Yuh-Jue Chuang
Abstract—In this paper, Huffman-code-based reversible variable length code (RVLC) construction algorithms are studied. We use graph models to represent the prefix, suffix, and Hamming distance relationships among RVLC candidate code words. The properties of the so-obtained graphs are investigated in detail, based on which we present two efficient RVLC construction algorithms: Algorithm 1 aims at minimizing the average code word length while Algorithm 2 jointly minimizes the average code word length and maximizes the error-detection probability at the same time.

Quasi-Cyclic Generalized LDPC Codes With Low Error Floors
Gianluigi Liva, William E. Ryan, and Marco Chiani
Abstract—In this paper, a novel methodology for designing structured generalized low-density parity-check (G-LDPC) codes is presented. The proposed design results in quasi-cyclic G-LDPC codes for which efficient encoding is feasible through shift-register-based circuits. The structure imposed on the bipartite graphs, together with the choice of simple component codes, leads to a class of codes suitable for fast iterative decoding. A pragmatic approach to the construction of G-LDPC codes is proposed. The approach is based on the substitution of check nodes in the protograph of a low-density parity-check code with stronger nodes based, for instance, on Hamming codes. Such a design approach, which we call low-density paritycheck (LDPC) code doping, leads to low-rate quasi-cyclic G-LDPC codes with excellent performance in both the error floor and waterfall regions on the additive white Gaussian noise channel.
G. Liva is with the Institute for Communications and Navigation, German Aerospace Centre (DLR), 82234 Weßling, Germany.
M. Chiani is with WiLAB/DEIS, University of Bologna, 47023 Cesena, Italy. W. E. Ryan is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724 USA. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.910585
Toward a Unified Framework for Modeling and Analysis of Diversity in Joint Source–Channel Coding
Andres Kwasinski and K. J. Ray Liu
Abstract—The study of joint source–channel Coding (JSCC) systems faces one major challenge in obtaining an analytical expression for the function that links end-to-end distortion with channel signal-to-noise ratio, the D-SNR curve. In this paper, for certain multimedia systems using practical source and channel codes in a JSCC bit rate allocation design, the D-SNR curve is shown to be well approximated by a set of carefully selected points where the relative contribution of channel errors to endto-end distortion is small. This approach has the potential advantage that it could be applied to represent the performance of many practical systems using JSCC bit rate allocation for which it is shown that the D-SNR function is approximately linear in log-log scales. A unified framework for the modeling, analysis, and performance measurement of these systems is proposed by considering a view of diversity more general than its usual interpretation. This view extends that of diversity to include redundant information so that coding and diversity gain are still used to characterize performance. Furthermore, the proposed approach is applied to study issues arising from using practical source and channel codes, including the effects on the performance of channel codes of different strength or source codes with different compression efficiency.
A. Kwasinski is with Texas Instruments, Inc., Germantown, MD 20874 USA. K. J. R. Liu is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742 USA. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.910586

C.-W. Lin and J.-L. Wu are with the Communication and Multimedia Laboratory, Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Y.-J. Chuang is with the Department and Graduate Institute of Health Care Management, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.910584

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:13:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

