An Analysis on the Applications of Markov Random Fields in Error Correcting
Codes of Nano Memory Cells

Dr.G. Padma
Professor, Department of Mathematics Sathyabama University, Chennai govindanpadma1970@gmail.com

Abstract— This paper Compares various Error correcting codes in Nano scale Memory cells in terms of Belief Propagation Algorithm which is applied in a Markov Random Field (MRF). Soft error correction is critical for different Nano scale devices performing storage. As the Nano memories are with High fault rates, the conventional Error correcting Codes (ECCs) are not directly applicable. To achieve higher error correcting capability, a system is required that has high error detecting and correcting ability, with toleration to relatively high soft error rates. Also it requires sparse encoding, decoding and checker circuits, So that they can be synthesized using simple Nano scale hardware. In this paper the comparison is made using Belief Propagation Algorithm which is applied on Bipartite Graphs which are the MRFs.
Keywords— Error correction codes, Nano scale Memory, LDPC, Turbo codes, Belief Propagation, Markov Random Field(MRF).
I. INTRODUCTION
In Electronics and computing occurrence of errors becomes a common and regular phenomenon. A soft error is any measurable or observable change in a state or performance of a microelectronic device, component, subsystem or a system (digital or analogue) resulting from a single particle strike. The first example of soft errors in circuits was observed in DRAMs. This was observed for the first time at sea level
In the early 80s most of the soft errors used to happen because of traces of radioactive elements like uranium and thorium in the packaging materials.The packaging radioactive decay usually causes a soft error by alpha particle emission. Soft Errors gradually started affecting static RAMs. The failure rate is between 100 to 1000 FITs. By 2012, soft errors will begin affecting logic circuits (adders, multipliers, and other complex units).There are two types of soft errors called Intrinsic soft errors caused by power supply noise, cross coupling noise and due to temperature variations. The other type of soft error called the Extrinsic soft error occurs due to Cosmic rays, alpha particles, neutrons, neutrinos, gluons. Soft error rates in processors and logic are also increasing as devices use smaller scales. Not only are these errors harder to

track than memory errors, their rate is expected to increase as speeds rise.
Soft errors are a matter of increasing concern as memories get larger and memory technologies get smaller. Even using a relatively conservative error rate (500 FIT/Mbit), a system with 1 GByte of RAM can expect an error every two weeks; a hypothetical Terabyte system would experience a soft error every few minutes.
Existing ECC technologies can greatly reduce the error rate, but they may have unacceptable tradeoffs in power, speed, price, or size. Soft errors can be disastrous for systems with large memories, critical applications, or high altitude locations. Some type of error detection/correction is mandatory in these cases, in spite of the cost in price and/or performance. Even with error correction, systems may be susceptible to multi-bit errors, hard errors, or errors in logic. These risks may need to be addressed with memory scrubbing, redundancy, self-healing mechanisms, Shielding, new advances in hardware technologies, and/or new error correction methods.
Soft errors can also be caused by random noise or signal integrity problems. Hence soft errors can be of more dangerous for systems of large memories. [13] refers due to the increase in soft error rate in logic circuits the encoder and decoder circuits around the memory blocks have become susceptible to soft errors and must be protected. Numerous methods have been proposed to improve reliability of circuits in the presence of increased soft error rates and single event upsets.
Traditional approaches include triple-modular redundancy (TMR), N-modular redundancy, cascaded TMR [11] and Error Correcting Codes (ECC) [12]. Multi-bit data in memory elements is protected using Error Correcting Codes (ECC), where a number of redundant bits are encoded into the data bits forming a code word.
When a codeword is accessed from memory, a decoder checks the parity bits to detect and correct any errors caused by corrupted data. Hamming code is a very popular code used in error-detection and correction in memory structures. [7] first proposed the use of Markov Random Fields for a

978-1-4799-3975-6/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014 IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Computing Research

probability-based design methodology. [8] proposed MRFs for Nano scale computation in the presence of noise and circuit errors and mapping of this probabilistic framework to modified CMOS-based circuitry.The mapping enabled circuits to operate reliably at very low sub threshold voltages (e.g. 150mV) was explored by [9]. There is a fundamental limit of the amount of information that can be reliably transmitted via a given channel called ‘Shannon limit’. Two types of codes are currently closest to the Shannon limit are Turbo codes
and Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes. [14] briefs
structural analysis by X-ray diffraction pattern which strongly indicates a high purity of biosynthesized AgNPs. The method explained is cost effective and greener for the synthesis of AgNPs and is applicable for a variety of purposes and is easy to scale-up the production of Ag Nanoparticle to industrial scale using this method.
II. RELIABILITY IN NANO ARCHITECTURE
Nanotechnology is the engineering of functional systems at the molecular scale. When moving to nanotechnology for device manufacture, they exhibit more errors due to manufacturing defects, ageing, and transient faults. Hence defect-tolerant architects will be required to design their logic around defect tolerance through redundancy. It is expected that Nano-scale devices and interconnections will produces unexpected level of defects in digital systems.
Hence it is desirable that systems exhibit dynamic fault or defect-tolerance. [2] explores for the management of defective and error-free devices using several fault- and defect- tolerant Nano architectures to achieve reliable integration of Nano devices. Although Nano-scale manufacturing will allow packing more devices on a chip, the possibilities of defects are high in the Nano- substrate. Hence defect-tolerant architecture is developed to meet the challenges of the inherent unreliability at the Nano scale [3,4,5,6]. Hence determining the granularity at which fault- tolerance is designed is very important in order to achieve a specific level of reliability the level of redundancy.
III. ERROR CORRECTING CODES ON MRFS
ECC is a method of adding redundant data or parity data to a message such that the message can be recovered by a receiver though a number of errors were introduced, either during the process transmission or on storage. Error correction Codes (ECC) becomes an extension of the reinforcement concept to fault-tolerance in larger systems. In this method the probabilities are converted into streams of stochastic bits using Bernoulli sequences in which the information is given by the statistics of the bit streams. Complex arithmetic operations on probabilities such as multiplication and division are transformed into operations on bits using elementary logic gates.
The benefits of applying MRF circuits in terms of superior noise immunity can be realised by using a modular approach for the protection of a large data set is analysed. Using a modular approach to protect data using three or four of the data bits at a time, more than single-bit error protection can be

achieved at a reduced transistor count is given in the following figure 1.
Fig. 1. Transistor count comparison between regular hamming decoder and modular MRF ECC
IV. BELIEF PROPAGATION ON MRFS If there are 100 binary variables or nodes then the Marginal distribution of a single node is the summation of the joint mass function over all other variables then the sum will be over 299 possible values which is computationally prohibitive. By exploiting the graphical structure, Belief propagation allows the Marginals to be computed much more efficiently. The Belief propagation algorithm calculates the marginal distribution for each unobserved node, conditional on any observed nodes. An algorithm is designed for Gaussian belief propagation and the solution for system of linear equations is obtained. The graphical model framework enables the construction and application of novel and relatively complex multivariate models in a straight forward and systematic manner. The noise threshold defines an upper bound for the channel noise up to which the probability of the lost information can be made as small as desired. Using belief propagation techniques LDPC codes can be decoded in time linear to their block length. The noise threshold defines an upper bound for the channel noise up to which the probability of the lost information can be made as small as desired. Using belief propagation techniques LDPC codes can be decoded in time linear to their block length. The algorithm used to decode LDPC codes is the Belief propagation algorithm or the message passing algorithm or the sum-product algorithm. In order to explain this algorithm, a very simple variant which works with hard decision, will be introduced first. Later on the algorithm will be extended to work with soft decision which generally leads to better decoding results. Turbo codes are a class of high performance FEC codes which closely approaches the channel capacity. These codes make use of three simple ideas such as parallel concatenation of codes which allows simpler decoding; interleaving to provide better weight distribution; and soft decoding to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014 IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Computing Research

enhance decoder decisions and maximize the gain from decoder interaction.
They also show excellent performance at high code rates and no puncturing is required. These codes have low complexity relative to coding gain and the cost is very less. The power consumption is also low. Also it gives a theoretical maximum for the code rate at which reliable communication is possible for a given specific noise level. [15] compares the error performance of UMP-BP based decoding algorithm and LDPC codes with BP algorithm for low SNR values and observes that the belief propagation algorithm converges in less number of iterations there by making the error correction using the LDPC codes efficiently.
V. COMPARISON BETWEEN LDPC CODES AND TURBO CODES
From the point of view of their parity check matrices, Turbo codes are actually very similar to Gallager codes (LDPC codes). Both families of codes are decoded using a local probability propagation algorithm which is known as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) or Belief Propagation (BP). When applied on Markov Random Fields (MRFs) both of these codes performs well in decoding. LDPC codes are quick to decode but have an encoding time that scales as N2 , whereas Turbo codes are usually defined in terms of linear time encoders.
The close relation between the iterative turbo decoding algorithm and Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm is elaborately discussed by [10]. Pearl’s algorithm can also be used to derive effective iterative decoding algorithms for a number of other error-control systems, including Gallager’s low density parity-check codes, the recently introduced low density generator matrix codes, serially concatenated codes and product codes.
This characteristic ’error floor’ or ’knee’ was also typical of Turbo codes in earlier years, but this has become less of a problem lately due to the definition of good permutation matrices. The number of iterations used may vary in the case of the LDPC codes, as the decoding quality may easily be checked, i.e. that if a valid code word is decoded, the decoding may be stopped.
Hence, there will be less and less iteration performed for the higher S/N. Hence, in order to characterize the complexity, a representative number of operations per code word was computed at Eb/N0 = 1dB. The maximum number of iterations was set to 100 for the smaller code and to 45 for the larger code.
This was chosen in order to give a fair comparison with Turbo codes. With the above parameters the bit error rate for the LDPC code was 0.0038 and 0.00054 for the I = 1784 and I = 3568 codes respectively, whereas for the Turbo code the bit error rate was 0.0043 and 0.00062 respectively.
An advantage with LDPC codes is that the decoders may be implemented in parallel. This has significant advantages when considering long codes.

Fig. 2. Comparison between LDPC codes and Turbo codes for the Information length 3568
Above figure shows that because of the error floor, turbo codes are not suitable for applications requiring extremely low BER’s, such as some scientific or command and control applications. Furthermore in turbo decoding, only information bits are decoded and they cannot be used for error detection.
In Turbo codes there is a sharp distinction between the bits viewed as source bits and the bits viewed as parity check bits; they play different roles in the decoding algorithm, and posterior probabilities over the states of parity check bits which are usually not computed. In Gallager codes, there is symmetry between all bits. Turbo codes originally defined tend to suffer from low weight code words which cause the asymptotic performance for large Eb/N0 to have an ‘error floor’. For high signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) the decoding is almost optimal, and the main problem is code words of low weight.
This region is usually referred to as the error-floor since the improvement for increasing signal-to-noise ratio is very small. When the signal to noise ratio is high a small number of iterations is sufficient. Gallager codes, in contrast, show no such error floor, and they have asymptotically good distance properties.
Gallager codes are simple to modify in order to create codes with higher or lower rates. In contrast, increasing the rate of a Turbo code can be tricky because simple puncturing of the parity bits might weaken the code by introducing low weight code words. [1] explores the bit and block error performances of a turbo code that uses the (64, 57) distance 4 Hamming code as the two component codes had an error floor but poor block error performance.
Suppose this turbo code is used as the inner code in concatenation with the extended (65520,61425) EG-LDPC code as the outer code then the overall rate of this concatenated LDPC-turbo system is 0.75 and achieves both good bit and block error performances. For both code lengths

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014 IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Computing Research

the LDPC codes are better until a certain S/N is reached, respectively Eb/N0 = 1.15 and 1.1 dB.
The poor minimum distance and lack of error detection capability make these codes perform badly in terms of block error probability. Performance also makes these codes not suitable for many communication applications.
On the contrary, finite geometry LDPC codes do not have all the above disadvantages of turbo codes, except that they may not perform as well as the turbo codes for BER’s above.
The advantage of extremely good error performance of turbo codes for BER’s above 10-4 and the advantages of EGLDPC codes such as no error floor, possessing error detection capability after decoding and good block error performance, can be combined to form a coding system that performs well for all ranges of SNR’s.
One such system is the concatenation of a turbo inner code and a finite geometry LDPC outer code. By combining both turbo coding and a finite geometry LDPC codes the error can be minimized. The finite geometry LDPC codes can be used as component codes in a turbo coding setup.
CONCLUSIONS
The sparseness (enabling low fan-in circuit implementation) and low computational overhead of decoding LDPC codes make them easy to implement using Nano scale hardware. LDPC codes are equipped with very fast (probabilistic) encoding and decoding algorithms. These codes are designed such that these algorithms can recover the original codeword in the face of large amounts of noise. LDPC codes are linear codes obtained from sparse bipartite graphs. In most graphical code representations, each variable node is associated with a bit in the transmitted codeword and observation compatibilities are determined by the noisy communication channel.
Both LDPC codes and Turbo codes when applied on MRFs perform well in encoding and decoding of errors. Hence by combining them and taking either of them as inner and outer codes and applying on MRFs reduces the decoding complexity for long random codes.

REFERENCES
[1] Yu Kou,Shu Lin,Marc P.C.Fossorier, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries: A Rediscovery and New Results,” IEEE Trans.Inform theory, vol. 47, no.7, 2001.
[2] J. Von Neumann, “Probabilistic logics and the synthesis of reliable organisms from unreliable components in Automata Studies,” C.E. Shannon and J. McKarthy, Eds. Princeton, NJ, Princeton Univ. Press, pp. 43–98, 1956.
[3] M. Rather and D. Rather, “Nano technology, Gentle introduction to the next big idea,” Prentice Hall, 2003.
[4] K. Nikotic A. Sadek and M. Forshaw, “Architectures for reliable computing with unreliable Nano devices,” In Proceeding of IEEENano’01, pp. 254-259, 2001.
[5] J. Han and P. Jonker, “A system architecture solution for unreliable Nano electronic devices,” IEEE transactions on Nano technology, vol. 1, Issue 4, pp. 201-208, Dec. 2002.
[6] J. Heath, G.S.P. Kuekes and R. Williams, “A defect tolerant computer architecture – Opportunities for Nano technology,” Science, vol. 80, pp.1716-1721, 1998.
[7] R.I. Bahar, J. Mundy, J. Jie Chen, “A Probabilistic based design methodology for Gallager.R.G, Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Cambridge, IRE Transactions Aided design, pp.480-486, Nov. 2003.
[8] K. Nepal, R.I. Bahar, J. Mundy, W.R. Patterson and A. Zaslavsky, “Designing logic circuits for probabilistic computation in the presence of noise,” In DAC, June 2005.
[9] S. Geman and K. Kochanek, “Dynamic programming and the graphical representation of error-correcting codes,” IEEE Tran. on Information Theory,vol. 7, pp. 549–568, April 2001.
[10] J. McEliece, D.J.C. MacKay and J.F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE Journal on selected areas in Communications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp.140-152, 1998.
[11] Shukla, Sandeep kumar, Bahar, R. Iris, “Nano, Quantum and Molecular Computing,” ISBN 978-1-4020-8067-8, 2004.
[12] A. Rapley, C. Winstead, V. Gaudet and C. Schlegel, “Stochastic iterative decoding on factor graphs”, In Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, pp. 507–510, Sept. 2003.
[13] S. Sharifi Tehrani, W.J. Gross and S. Mannor, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes”, IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 10, pp.716– 718, Oct. 2006.
[14] G.A. Mansoori et al, “Synthesis of Silver Nano particles using Silybum Marianum seed Extract”, in International journal of Nanoscience, Nanotechnology, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 221-226, 2013.
[15] G. Padma et al, “A Probabilistic-Graphical approach for Error correction in Nanoscale Memory cells”, National conference at Sathyabama University (NCEVENT11), pp.717-721, 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:41:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

