An Improved-Performance Decoding Algorithm of LDPC Codes for Layered Decoding

Jia. Li, Gaigai. Yang, Zhiqiang. Zhao
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China Qingshuihe Campus of UESTC, No.2006, Xiyuan Avenue, West Hi-tech Zone
Chengdu, Sichuan P.R.China

Abstract- In order to reduce the bit error rate of low-density parity-check codes for layered decoding algorithm and improve the decoding convergence speed, an improved layered decoding algorithm is proposed. In layered decoding algorithm, updated bit nodes information can be used by check nodes in the iteration process while in dynamic decoding algorithm check nodes update in order according to the reliability. The proposed algorithm combines advantages of the layered and dynamic decoding algorithm. Moreover, compared with the definition of remaining information for check nodes in the dynamic decoding algorithm, a new method to evaluate the reliability is defined in the proposed algorithm. Based on 1/2 code rate china mobile multimedia broadcasting standard, simulation and comparison between the conventional layered decoding algorithm and the proposed layered decoding algorithm have been carried out. The simulation results show that under the same bit error rate, the signal to noise ratio of the improved algorithm reduces nearly 0.4dB as well as convergence speed improves obviously. The proposed layered decoding algorithm reduces the bit error rate and improves the reliability of data in communication system which uses LDPC codes as the channel coding.
Keywords—low-density parity-check; layered decoding; dynamic decoding; china mobile multimedia broadcasting
I. INTRODUCTION
The channel encoding Low-density parity-check(LDPC) codes were first introduced by Gallager in his 1962 thesis [1]. LDPC codes not only have good distance characteristics, small decoding error probability and low decoding complexity, but also have no mistake platform when the code length (such as larger than 200) is appropriate. Otherwise, its code rate is easy to be adjusted [2]. Decoding algorithm of LDPC codes is an important factor affecting their performance. Decoding algorithms now are mainly divided into parallel decoding algorithm, serial decoding algorithm and dynamic decoding algorithm [3]. The layered algorithm [4] which can be called layered belief propagation (LBP) algorithm which belongs to serial algorithm is an improvement of sum-product decoding algorithm [5]. Check nodes are updated in turn according to the parity-check matrix. Firstly, check node information is updated in each iteration, then all bit nodes connecting to the check node are updated. The layered decoding algorithm has the characteristic that updated bit node information can be used by check nodes, resulting in higher decoding convergence speed and less iteration times. A reliability criterion of check nodes is given by the dynamic decoding algorithm. According to the reliability, updated check nodes ____________________________________ 978-1-4799-44- /14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

in order can further accelerate the decoding convergence speed and improve the decoding efficiency. LBP algorithm which used in this paper has disadvantage that check nodes information update in the algorithm is asynchronous which results in worse reliability of the check node processed earlier[6]. To overcome the disadvantage, dynamic decoding algorithm updating check nodes orderly according to the reliability is used and the determination methods of reliability in reference [7] is considered. Thus, an improved-performance layered decoding algorithm is proposed.

II. LAYERED DECODING ALGORITHM

In layered decoding algorithm, the parity-check matrix H is divided into several layers based on rows. The updated check node information of top layer can be applied immediately to calculate the check node information of the next layer. Bit nodes posteriori probability is updated after the information from check node to bit node updates. Due to update the posteriori probability frequently, the convergence speed becomes higher [8] and the improved decoding performance is obtained at the certain largest number of iteration. Fig. 1 shows this process.
1 11000 0 0 1110 0 0 0111 1 10001

check node

bit node
Figure 1. Layered decoding process
The flow of Layered decoding algorithm is:

1. Initialization: I = 0; Lvj = Rj ; mci →vj = 0;
I represents iteration number, Rj represents bit nodes initial values, Lvj represents bit nodes values, mci →vj represents the
updated information from check nodes to bit nodes.

2. Calculate each check node using (1) and update bit nodes

connected to the check node immediately after the check node

updated using (2);

∏ m( k ) ci →v j

=

2

tanh−1

ª « «¬ vb ∈N ( ci

)/vj

tanh

§ ¨©¨

Lvb

− m(k−1) ci →vb 2

·º ¸¹¸»»¼

(1)

Lv j

= Lv j

− m(k −1) ci →v j

+ m(k) ci →v j

(2)

3. Judge bit nodes:



Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:38:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

cˆi

=

°­1 ®¯°0

Lvj ≤ 0 Lvj > 0

(3)

4. Judge end conditions:

I = Imax

(4)

or

T
Hc =0

(5)

Imax represents the maximum iteration number and
H represents parity-check matrix.

If end conditions are satisfied, then end the decoding.

Otherwise, enter the next iteration.

I = I+1

(6)

5. Back to execute step two.

III. DYNAMIC DECODING ALGORITHM

Dynamic decoding algorithm introduces the definition of

residual information which is the absolute value of the

difference between check nodes and updated check nodes [9].

Residual information can be defined as:

( ) R m = m − m ci →vk

new ci →vk

old ci →vk

(7)

The check node which has the biggest residual information

has the priority to update and transfer its all logarithmic
likelihood information mci →vk ( vk ∈ N (ci ) ). Similar with LBP
algorithm, dynamic decoding algorithm transfers the check

node’s all logarithmic likelihood information at the same time.

However, the difference is that it chooses the check node which has the biggest residual information [10] αci to update
and transfer. That’s to say, check nodes update orderly.

Biggest residual information is defined as:

( ) αci

= max R
vk ∈N (ci )

mci →vk

(8)

The flow of dynamic decoding algorithm is:

1. Initialization:

( ) mci →vk = 0; mvk →ci = Cvk ; vk ∈ N ci

mvk →ci represents the information from bit nodes to check nodes and Cvk are the initial values.
2. Calculate biggest residual information αc of all check nodes
using (7) and (8).

3. Find out the check node number i which has the biggest
residual information;

i = arg maxαc 4. Update and transfer mci →vk ; vk ∈ N (ci ) .

∏ mci →vk

=

2

tanh −1

ª « «¬vb∈N (ci )/vk

tanh

§ ©¨¨

mvb →ci 2

·º ¸¸¹¼»»

(9)

vk ∈ N (ci ) represents all bit nodes vk connected to the check
node ci . And update and transfer mvk →ca ; ca ∈ N (vk ) / ci .

¦ mvk = Cvk +

mca →vk

ca∈N(vk )

(10)

m = m − m vk →ca

vk

ca →vk

(11)

ca ∈ N (vk ) represents all check nodes ca connected to the

bit node vk .

( ) 5. Calculate : αca

= max R
vk ∈N (ca )

mca →vk

.

6. Set: αci = 0 .

7. Judge: If end conditions are not satisfied, back to the step three.

IV. IMPROVED LAYERED DECODING ALGORITHM
In layered decoding algorithm, updated bit nodes information can be used by check nodes in the iteration process while in dynamic decoding algorithm check nodes update in order according to the reliability size. The proposed algorithm combines advantages of the layered and dynamic decoding algorithm. Moreover, different form the remaining information definition of check nodes in the dynamic decoding algorithm, the improved algorithm references the determination methods of reliability in literature [7]. Since check nodes in the layered decoding algorithm update in real time in once iteration, updated bit nodes information can be used by check nodes updated latter. The check node with higher reliability has the priority to update in order to reduce the effect caused by the high bit error rate node on the bit node updated latter.
For check node ck , the reliability r (ck ) is defined as:
r (ck ) = min Lvj + sub − min Lvj , vj ∈ N (ck ) (12)
Lvj is the log likelihood ratio (LLR) of bit
node v j , sub − min is the second minimum value , and N (ck ) represents all bit nodes connected to ck .
The flow of improved decoding algorithm is : 1. Initialization:
I = 0 ; Lvj = R j ; mci →vj = 0
2. Sort check nodes from big to small according to the reliability using (12). 3. Update check nodes orderly using (1) and update bit nodes which are connected to the check node immediately using (2). 4. Judge bit nodes using (3). 5. Judge end conditions using (4) and (5):
If end conditions are satisfied, then end the decoding. Otherwise, enter the next iteration using (6). 6. Back to execute step two;
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS OF SIMULATION
Simulation and comparison between the conventional layered decoding algorithm and the proposed layered decoding algorithm have been carried out on MATLAB platform. Meanwhile, AWGN channel, the BPSK modulation

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:38:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

method and china mobile multimedia broadcasting standard 1/2 code rate LDPC codes have been utilized. To simplify the calculation, the normalize min-sum algorithm [5] is applied in the simulation and the normalized coefficient is 0.8.

TABLE I.
Code rate 1/2 3/4

LDPC CODE CONFIGURATION IN CMMB STANDARD

Message bit length K (bit) 4608 6912

Code length N (bit) 9216 9216

TABLE I shows LDPC code configuration in CMMB standard (1/2 code rate LDPC codes: row weight is 6 and column weight is 3).
Fig.2 and Fig.3 show the comparison of the decoding performance of the proposed algorithm and conventional algorithms. Fig.4 and Fig.5 show the comparison of the decoding convergence speed of the proposed algorithm and conventional algorithms (N-D-LBP represents the proposed layered algorithm using normalized min-sum to simplify the calculation, N-LBP-MinSum shows the conventional layered algorithm using normalized min-sum to simplify the calculation, LBP states the conventional layered algorithm and NO-DECODE depicts that codes which don’t be decoded).
Firstly, in order to reflect the decoding performance, the relationship between the signal-to-noise ratio and the bit error rate has been simulated. 20 data groups are used and the maximum iteration number is 2. SNR ranges from 0dB to 3dB and 0.2dB step is set. As is shown in Fig.2, under the same bit error rate, the SNR of the proposed algorithm reduces nearly 0.4dB compared with the conventional layered algorithm.

Figure 3. Bit error rate under different signal-to-noise ratios
Secondly, in order to reflect the decoding convergence speed, the relationship between the iteration number and the bit error rate has been simulated. 20 data groups are used, iteration ranges from 1 to 3 and SNR is 0.5dB. As is shown in Fig.4, under the same BER, the convergence speed of the proposed algorithm is improved obviously.
Figure 4. Bit error rate under different iterations
As is shown in Fig.5, different from Fig.4, SNR is 1dB. Under the same BER, the iteration number of the proposed algorithm reduces obviously.

Figure 2. Bit error rate under different signal-to-noise ratios
As is shown in Fig.3, different from Fig.2, 0.1dB step is set. Under the same bit error rate, the SNR of the proposed algorithm reduces nearly 0.5dB compared with the conventional layered algorithm.

Figure 5. Bit error rate under different iterations
CONCLUSION
In this paper, an improved-performance layered decoding algorithm of LDPC codes is proposed. Check nodes are updated in order according to the reliability which is calculated by the sum of the absolute value of minimum and second minimum in this algorithm. The earlier updated bit node with higher bit error rate may cause worse bit error rate

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:38:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of bit node updated latter. In order to reduce this effect, the check node with higher reliability has the priority to update. The proposed algorithm is simulated under different SNR and iterations. The results show that it has advantages of both layered decoding algorithm and dynamic decoding algorithm. Meanwhile, compared with the conventional layered algorithms, the proposed algorithm can accelerate the convergence speed and reduce the SNR about 0.4dB to 0.5dB under the same BER. Moreover, it improves the reliability of data transmission in communication systems which use LDPC codes as channel coding.
REFERENCES
[1] R.G.Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] WenHong,Fuchusheng,ZhouLiang.LDPC code principle and application [M]. sichuan: University of Electronic Science and Technology of China press, 2006:6.
[3] WuSheng. Decoding Algorithm Research and Its Implementation of LDPC Codes Based on CMMB Standard [D].Guangdong:South China University of Technology,2010,40-43.
.

[4] Hocevar D.A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes [A].In Proc.Signal Processing System SIPS 2004 [C].October 2004:107-112.
[5] Sarah J.Johnson.Iterative Error Correction [M].2.New York:Cambridge University,2010:61-64.
[6] WEN Lei,LEI Jing.Convergence analysis for LDPC serial decoding [J].Journal of Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications press,2006,18(2):161.
[7] ZHU Qing,WU Le-nan.Low-Complexity Check-Node-Based Serial Scheduling Belief Propagation for LDPC Codes [J].Information process press,2013,29(5):553.
[8] Yang Wei,Zhang Wei.A Decoding Algorithm Based on Layered Decoding and Min-max for Nonbinary LDPC Codes [J].Journal of Electronics & Information Technology,2013,35(7):1677-1681.
[9] JIANG Xiao-bo, WU Sheng. Research of dynamic LDPC decoding algorithm in CMMB [J]. Journal of circuits and systems, 2010,15(3):6061.
[10] Elidan G, McGraw I, Koller D. Residual belief propagation:informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing [A]. In Proc.22nd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence [C].MIT,Cambridge,MA,July 2006.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:38:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

