Globecom 2014 - Symposium on Selected Areas in Communications: GC14 SAC Data Storage

Modelling of the Threshold Voltage Distributions of Sub-20nm NAND Flash Memory
Thomas Parnell, Nikolaos Papandreou, Thomas Mittelholzer, and Haralampos Pozidis IBM Research - Zurich
Sa¨umerstrasse 4, CH-8803, Ru¨schlikon, Switzerland {tpa, npo, tmi, hap}@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract—The proliferation of NAND flash memory in consumer devices has driven their aggressive cost reduction by continuous scaling to smaller technology nodes. However, this relentless cost per capacity improvement has diminished the reliability of flash memory to a degree that advanced signal processing and error correction are needed to enhance signal integrity in current flash-based systems. Accurate models of flash readback signals are necessary to properly design such advanced signal enhancement schemes. We propose a new parametric model of the flash readback signal based on fitting threshold voltage distributions from NAND flash devices. We show accurate fitting results for flash devices cycled up to 10 times longer than their nominal endurance specification, and provide simple expressions of the model parameters as a function of program/erase cycles. Finally, we also demonstrate that the proposed model can be used to capture effects such as programming errors, that occur in over-stressed flash devices.
I. INTRODUCTION
NAND flash memory is the ubiquitous storage medium in portable consumer devices, where it has enabled a tremendous increase in storage capacity as well as novel applications. More recently flash memory started penetrating the enterprise storage/computing space, primarily because of its aggressive cost reduction roadmap made possible by continuous process innovations from the memory manufacturers and adoption of ever smaller technology nodes. A further significant contributor to the cost reduction of flash has been the introduction of multilevel-cell technology, whereby multiple bits of information are stored in each memory cell, at only a moderate increase of manufacturing cost. Typical examples are MLC and TLC, with storage of 2 and 3 bits per memory cell, respectively.
A byproduct of the memory cell shrinkage, from the shift to lower technology nodes, is a reduction of reliability. This manifests itself in the form of lower program/erase (P/E) cycling endurance, shorter data retention, and increased susceptibility to disturbance and interference effects. In order to cope with the continuous deterioration in reliability, advanced signal processing and error correction coding (ECC) schemes have been introduced by flash solution vendors in the recent years. In particular, for the current sub-20nm flash technology it has been suggested that a shift to advanced soft-decision based ECC may be necessary to achieve adequate reliability levels, especially for enterprise applications.
Advanced ECC schemes require extensive simulation and fine tuning in order to bring the performance benefits they are

capable of [1]. Accurate models of the flash readback signal, i.e., the threshold voltage of the flash cell, are indispensable tools in the process of building effective error correction codes. Despite the importance of the topic, only sparse references to flash signal modelling can be found in the literature. In some cases the threshold voltage distribution is modelled as a mixture of Gaussian distributions with data-dependent variances [2], sometimes without evidence from fitting to experimental signals [3]. In [4] several statistical functions are applied to fit experimentally obtained flash signals. Although it is found that other functions exhibit a better fit than the Gaussian function, it is still suggested to use the Gaussian for its simplicity. In that work the experimental signals used to qualify the model fit are extracted from flash devices that have been cycled a mere 1000 cycles, well within the endurance limit of the device, in this case equal to 3000 cycles. In [5] it is argued that exponential tails in flash threshold voltage distributions arise due to random telegraph noise effects, and that these tails are asymmetric at left and right ends of the distributions. Finally, a model based on cell-to-cell interference with uniform write-noise distributions for non-erase levels is proposed in [1]. This model comes from intuition and no experimental evidence is provided for its validity.
In this paper we propose a new parametric model for the threshold voltage distributions in MLC NAND flash devices. The model is validated by fitting to experimental data, and is shown to accurately capture the experimental threshold voltage distributions for flash devices that are cycled up to 10 times more than their cycling endurance specification. To our knowledge, this is the first work showing fitting of experimental flash distributions at such extreme numbers of P/E cycles. As a further validation of the accuracy of the proposed model, it is shown that the synthetic bit error rate (BER) obtained from the model closely matches the experimentally measured BER. Several prior works have reported that their models, mostly Gaussian mixtures, under-estimate the true BER, for example [2] and [6]. A parameterized version of the proposed model is provided, describing the evolution of the model parameters as a function of P/E cycles. Finally, the proposed model is shown to capture effects akin to those caused by programming errors, that appear to be leading causes of error in scaled flash devices when cycled extensively [7]. The endurance enhancement that may be achieved if such programming errors could be prevented is evaluated.

978-1-4799-3512A-3ut/h1o4r/iz$e3d1l.i0ce0n©se2d0u1s4e IliEmEitEed to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J3un5e124,2026 at 17:41:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Globecom 2014 - Symposium on Selected Areas in Communications: GC14 SAC Data Storage

II. MLC NAND FLASH CHARACTERIZATION
A. NAND Memory Architecture and Page Programming
The memory array in NAND flash is organized in blocks and each block consists of a number of pages. The memory cells in the block are defined by an array structure of wordlines (WLs) and bit-lines (BLs). A page consists of the cells on a WL and contains either the LSB (least significant bit) or the MSB (most significant bit) of the 2-bit information. The LSB and MSB pages are usually referred to as lower and upper pages, respectively. Depending on the actual memory array configuration, an even-odd BL or all-BL architecture is defined [8].
Fig. 1 illustrates the page programming steps in MLC NAND. Before (re)-programming a page in the block, the entire block has to be erased (state E). In order to store 2 bits of information per cell, a programming mechanism that modifies the threshold voltage (VTH) of each cell to multiple discrete levels (states A, B, C) is applied. The programming procedure typically involves 2 steps for MLC NAND, whereby first the lower page (LSB) of the cells in a WL is programmed followed by the upper page (MSB). In the first step, the cells will either remain in the erased state or be programmed to an intermediate state depending on the LSB. In the second step, the MSB is programmed and the final state of each cell will depend on both LSB and MSB as the table in Fig 1 shows. Various algorithms and technology advancements have been proposed in order to improve the programming mechanism as the technology shrinks and the VTH margin is limited [9]. The principle illustrated in Fig. 1 is extended to lower, middle and upper page programming for 3 bit per cell (TLC) NAND [10].
Various factors have been shown to affect the stability of the programmed VTH distributions such as program/erase cycling, data retention, read disturb, and cell-to-cell interference [11]– [13]. These mechanisms affect the error rate performance during the read operation and thus compromise the reliability of the device over its lifetime. Moreover, errors can take place during data programming. Before programming the MSB, typically, a read level threshold (VLPONLY) is applied in order for the write mechanism to detect the previously written LSB and thus decide upon the MSB programming sequence. In the case where the LSB is erroneously detected the final programmed VTH will be erroneous. As the stability of the VTH distributions deteriorates over the device lifetime, such errors may appear more frequently resulting in significant error propagation and error performance deterioration [7]. Fig. 1 illustrates the above error events for the case of cells being in the erased state.
B. Extraction of histograms
By shifting the read voltage levels it is possible to extract information about the underlying threshold voltage distributions. Fig. 1 shows the 3 read voltages (VA, VB, VC ) that are used for multilevel detection when both LSB and MSB have been written to the cells. Suppose that we are able to shift the nominal read voltages by a constant shift ∆. Let V denote the

Fig. 1. Illustration of MLC NAND programming steps for the (a) lower page and (b) the upper page. The final state of each cell depends on the level mapping (c).

random variable corresponding to the threshold voltage of the flash cell we are attempting to read, then the data obtained from reading the lower page with read voltage (VB + ∆) is given by:

RL(∆) =

0 if V > VB + ∆ 1 otherwise

(1)

Similarly, when reading from the upper page with read voltages (VA + ∆, VC + ∆) the readback data depends on the underlying threshold voltage V as follows:

RU (∆) =

0 if VA + ∆ < V ≤ VC + ∆ 1 otherwise

(2)

To extract the histograms of the MLC threshold voltage distribution across a collection of cells we perform a read sweep by varying the shift value ∆ and reading from all pages in the flash block. The shift value is varied from −n × to +n × for some integer parameter n > 0 and step size ≥ 1. Provided there is no overlap between the shifted read voltages (VA + n < VB − n and VB + n < VC − n ) then for each flash cell the output of the read sweep is a binary vector that corresponds to one of Nbin = 6n + 4 unique bin labels.
We proceed to build four conditional histograms, counting the number of cells in a flash block that map to each bin index conditional on the written state of the cell. Let Hk(X) be the number of cells found to be in the k-th bin given the written state of the cell X then for k = 1, . . . , Nbin and X ∈ {E, A, B, C} we can estimate the probability of being in the k-th bin conditional on the written state X, Pk(X), as follows:

Pk(X) =

Hk (X )

Nbin k=1

Hk (X )

(3)

Given a large enough sample size the estimate Pk(X) will converge to the true probability:

Rk

Pk(X) −→

ρX (z)dz

(4)

Lk

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J3un5e224,2026 at 17:41:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Globecom 2014 - Symposium on Selected Areas in Communications: GC14 SAC Data Storage

(a) L P/E Cycles

(b) 5L P/E Cycles Fig. 2. Gaussian fit to threshold voltage distributions

(c) 10L P/E Cycles

where ρX (z) is the underlying probability density function of the cell threshold voltage conditional on the written state X and the intervals (Lk, Rk) are defined by the shifted reads and given explicitly below:

−∞





Lk

=

VA − (n − k + 1) VB − (3n − k + 2)





VC − (5n − k + 3)

VA − (n − k)



Rk

=

VB − (3n − k + 1) VC − (5n − k + 2)





+∞

if k = 0 if k = 1, . . . , 2n + 1 if k = 2n + 2, . . . , 4n + 2 if k = 4n + 3, . . . , 6n + 3
if k = 0, . . . , 2n if k = 2n + 1, . . . , 4n + 1 if k = 4n + 2, . . . , 6n + 2 if k = 6n + 3

III. MODELLING THE THRESHOLD VOLTAGE
DISTRIBUTIONS
In this section we present and compare two models of the probability density functions ρX (z): the Gaussian model and the Normal-Laplace mixture model. Fitting of the Gaussian model was previously considered in [1], [2] and [4] and is provided here for the purpose of comparison only.

Fig. 3. Correlation between model BER and experimental BER
We proceed to fit the Gaussian model to the experimental data by finding the (µX ,σX ) that minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the experimental bin probabilities and those that arise from the Gaussian model (6) for X ∈ {E, A, B, C}:

A. Gaussian Model
Let us model the threshold voltage of a cell that has been written to the state X ∈ {E, A, B, C} using a random variable, V (X), defined as follows:

V (X) = µX + σX W

(5)

where W ∼ N (0, 1) is a random variable distributed according to a standard Gaussian distribution and (µX , σX ) are model parameters. Such a model gives rise to the following bin probabilities:

Qk(X)(µX , σX ) = F (Rk, µX , σX ) − F (Lk, µX , σX ) (6)

where F (z, µ, σ) is the Gaussian cumulative distribution function (CDF). The Kullback-Leibler divergence between two arbitrary probability distributions P and Q is defined as follows:

DKL P ; Q

Nbin
= Pk log
k=1

Pk Qk

(7)

(µˆX , σˆX ) = arg min DKL P (X); Q(X)(µX , σX )
µX ,σX
Nbin
= arg max Pk(X) log Q(kX)(µX , σX ) (8)
µX ,σX k=1
We maximize (8) using the Nelder-Mead simplex method [14] to obtain the best-fit pairs (µˆX , σˆX ) for all X ∈ {E, A, B, C}.
The Gaussian model was tested using experimental data from a block of 1x-nm flash memory subjected to up to 10L program/erase cycles where L is the cycling endurance limit specified by the manufacturer. The experiment was performed at room temperature and a dwell time of 2s was used between consecutive program and erase operations. During each program operation, a random data pattern was programmed to every page of the block. The fitting of (8) was performed using data from different snapshots during the cycling process. In Fig. 2 the best-fit Gaussian probability density functions are compared with the experimental bin probabilities (scaled to account for bin width). The vertical lines correspond to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J3un5e324,2026 at 17:41:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Globecom 2014 - Symposium on Selected Areas in Communications: GC14 SAC Data Storage

(a) L P/E Cycles

(b) 5L P/E Cycles

(c) 10L P/E Cycles

Fig. 4. Normal-Laplace Mixture fit to threshold voltage distributions

the shifted read voltages that define the bins. We find that during the initial stages of the experiment (e.g. at L P/E cycles) the Gaussian model provides a good fit to the bulk of the underlying distributions but slightly heavier tails are observed in the experimental data even at this early stage. As the flash is cycled to more extreme conditions (e.g. 5L, 10L P/E cycles) the Gaussian fit ceases to effectively capture the characteristics of the experimental distributions. In particular, the experimental distributions exhibit strong asymmetry, exponential tails and a multi-modal behavior.
Another demonstration that the Gaussian model is ineffective is provided by Fig. 3 where the experimental BER is plotted against the synthetic BER obtained from the Gaussian model at each cycling point. We notice that the Gaussian model consistently under-estimates the experimental BER even in the early stages of cycling (e.g. the low BER region). This observation is consistent with the findings of [2] and [6]. We conclude that a model of the threshold voltage distributions must capture these underlying non-Gaussian behaviors if it is to provide useful insights into statistical properties such as BER.

B. Normal-Laplace Mixture Model

The asymmetric exponential behavior observed on the tails of the experimental distributions motivates the following ideal model for the threshold voltage of a cell, Videal(X), written to state X ∈ {E, A, B, C}:

Videal(E) = µE + αE−1Z1

(9)

Videal(A) = µA + σAW + αA−1Z1 − β−1Z2 (10)

Videal(B) = µB + σBW + αB−1Z1 − β−1Z2 (11)

Videal(C) = µC − β−1Z2

(12)

where W ∼ N (0, 1) is a standard Gaussian random variable and Z1,Z2 are distributed according to a standard exponential distribution. The model has 10 parameters: (µA, µB, µC , µE) relate to the means of the distributions, (σA, σB) relate to the scale of the (A,B) distributions, (αE, αA, αB) determine the right-tail exponential behavior of the (E,A,B) distributions and β determines the left-tail exponential behavior of the (A,B,C) distributions. We note that Videal(E) and Videal(C) are distributed according to a shifted exponential distribution,

whereas Videal(A) and Videal(B) follow what is known as a Normal-Laplace distribution [15]. The model could be expanded to include additional parameters so that all four distributions are of Normal-Laplace type but some parameters (e.g. the right-tail of the C distribution) cannot be determined due to the limited range of the shifted read command.
Let φE(z), φA(z), φB(z), φC (z) denote the probability density functions corresponding to the ideal model defined in equations (9)-(12). To try to capture the multi-modal behavior that has been observed in the experimental distributions we introduce the notion of programming error: the possibility that a cell appears to be programmed to a state other than the intended state. Such events can be caused by the twostep programming algorithm commonly used in MLC flash memories [7] or they may arise due to an erase failure. We now expand our model to account for programming errors by introducing the following probability density functions (which we will refer to as the Normal-Laplace mixture model) for all X ∈ {E, A, B, C}:

ΦX (z) =

λX,Y φY (z + δX,Y )

(13)

Y ∈{E,A,B,C}

where parameters λX,Y > 0 correspond to the probability of a cell appearing to be programmed to the Y distribution when we intended to program to X and δX,Y are shift parameters. For all X ∈ {E, A, B, C} we have the following constraint:

λX,E + λX,A + λX,B + λX,C = 1

(14)

We assume always that δ(X, X) = 0 and use equation (14) to further reduce the number of model parameters since:

λX,X = 1 −

λX,Y

(15)

Y =X

Accordingly, by allowing for the possibility of a cell appearing to be programmed to some (shifted) version of a distribution other than the intended distribution we have introduced up to 24 additional parameters to the model. When fitting to the experimental data we reduce this number to 10 by further assuming:

λE,A = λA,E = λB,E = λB,A = λC,E = λC,A = λC,B = 0 δE,A = δA,E = δB,E = δB,A = δC,E = δC,A = δC,B = 0

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J3un5e424,2026 at 17:41:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Globecom 2014 - Symposium on Selected Areas in Communications: GC14 SAC Data Storage

(a) Programming Error Probabilities

(b) Means

(c) Standard Deviations

Fig. 5. Evolution of model parameters during cycling

(d) Exponential Parameters

We are thus left with the problem of fitting the 20 parameter Normal-Laplace mixture model to the experimental data. We follow the same approach as in the previous subsection - minimizing Kullback-Leibler divergence between the experimental bin probabilities and the bin probabilities that arise from the model which are given as follows:

Q(kX) =

λX,Y

Y ∈{E,A,B,C}

Rk
φY (z + δX,Y )dz
Lk

(16)

Since we have only allowed for the possibility of a cell appearing to be programmed to a state of higher charge than the intended state, the fitting can be performed in an iterative manner - starting with fitting the C distribution (2 variables), followed by the B distribution (5 variables), followed by the A distribution (7 variables) and finally the E distribution (6 variables). The Nelder-Mead simplex method was used for all minimization.
In Fig. 4 we compare the experimental bin probabilities (scaled to account for the bin width) with the probability density functions obtained by fitting the Normal-Laplace mixture model to experimental data captured from a 1x-nm flash device. We observe that the asymmetric exponential behavior in the tails now matches closely with the experimental data and the model even manages to capture the bumps that appear on the far tails when the flash is cycled far beyond its specification. A further demonstration of the validity of the Normal-Laplace model is presented in Fig. 3 where we plot the BER as predicted by the model against the experimental BER. Unlike the Gaussian model, we observe almost an exact agreement even when BER approaches 0.1.

IV. ANALYSIS
In the previous section a new model for the threshold voltage distributions of NAND flash memory was presented, that accurately captures all wear-out effects that take place when cycling the flash memory to ten times over its specification. In this section we study how the model parameters evolve as a function of P/E cycles and present a parameterized version of the model. We then use this compact model to predict how the flash will behave when it is cycled beyond the scope of our characterization experiments (more than 10L), and also examine what kind of endurance improvement could be expected if it were possible to prevent programming errors

TABLE I PARAMETERIZED NL-MIXTURE MODEL

Parameter Functional Form c2

c1

c0

λE,B (x) exp(c1x + c0)

0.87 -11.89

λE,C (x) exp(c1x + c0)

1.41 -19.82

λA,B (x) exp(c1x + c0)

1.63 -19.22

λA,C (x) exp(c1x + c0)

0.73 -11.67

λB,C (x) exp(c1x + c0)

1.50 -17.69

µE (x) µA(x) µB (x) µC (x)

c1x + c0

1.52 -150.81

c1xc2 + c0 0.17 12.96

61.12

c1xc2 + c0 0.26 11.69 186.86

c1xc2 + c0 0.39 6.83 319.38

σA(x)

c0

14.95

σB (x)

c0

11.62

1/αA(x)

c1x + c0

0.65

6.36

1/αB (x)

c1x + c0

0.53

6.48

1/αE (x)

c1x + c0

1.84 14.28

1/β(x)

c1x + c0

0.37

5.13

(by improvements to the programming and erase algorithms for instance).
A. Parameterized Model
In Fig. 5 we study how the model parameters evolve as a function of P/E cycles (normalized by L). Firstly in Fig. 5(a) we plot the programming error probabilities (λE,B, λE,C , λA,B, λA,C , λB,C ) and observe that they increase exponentially as a function of normalized P/E cycles (an exponential fit is also plotted using dashed lines). In Fig. 5(b) we see that the parameters (µA, µB, µC ) increase slightly in the beginning of cycling and then stay fairly constant. These 3 parameters are fitted using a power law function. The parameter (µE) is treated separately since we observe that it continues to increase slowly up to 10L P/E cycles, thus a linear fit is used. In Fig. 5(c) we see that the parameters (σA, σB) appear to stay relatively constant and are therefore modelled as such. Finally in Fig. 5(d) we plot the inverse of the rate parameters (β, αE, αA, αB) and observe a linear dependence on program/erase cycles. An interesting observation is that the exponential tail on the erase distribution (αE) appears to get heavier much faster than the other exponential parameters. There are 5 parameters that are not plotted, (δE,B, δE,C , δA,B, δA,C , δB,C ), since these parameters are set to zero in the parameterized model. We find that, although these additional parameters are useful for helping the fitting algorithm converge, the BER performance does not

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J3un5e524,2026 at 17:41:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Globecom 2014 - Symposium on Selected Areas in Communications: GC14 SAC Data Storage

change dramatically if they are set to zero. Table I provides the functional form and coefficients of the parameterized model that have been extracted from the data, where model parameter x denotes P/E cycles normalized by L.
B. Extending Raw Endurance
In Fig. 6 we plot the BER of the parameterized model (described in Table I) as a function of P/E cycles and compare with the experimental BER. The effect of parameterization is a slight loss of accuracy in the early stages of cycling, but soon thereafter the parameterized model seems to follow very closely the experimental data points. We see that as we approach 10L P/E cycles the BER starts to increase very rapidly, which our model attributes to the exponential increase in programming error probability. Another set of curves is plotted which correspond to the BER performance as predicted by the Normal-Laplace mixture model if we set: λE,B = λE,C = λA,B = λA,C = λB,C = 0. We find that the BER behavior is dramatically improved allowing us to speculate that if it were possible to reduce programming errors (e.g. by following an approach akin to that described in [7]) then endurance could be significantly extended: from 9L to 15L (a factor of 1.7) at BER=0.01, marked on Fig. 6 with a horizontal dashed-line, which is the region of interest for advanced coding schemes such as LDPC codes [16].
V. CONCLUSION
A new parametric model for the threshold voltage distributions of NAND flash memory was presented that has been shown to accurately capture all wear-out effects that take place when cycling the flash memory up to ten times over its specification. We have studied the evolution of the model parameters as a function of P/E cycles and then used this compact model to predict the behavior of the flash device when it is cycled beyond the scope of our characterization experiments (more than 10L). The proposed model has also been used to assess the endurance improvement that could be expected if it were possible to prevent programming errors.
A natural extension of this work would be to fit the NormalLaplace mixture model to the experimental distributions obtained by conditioning on the state of neighbouring aggressor cells thus taking into account cell-to-cell interference effects. The model could also be used to fit the distributions obtained by subjecting flash cells to data retention and read disturb stress. Finally, the model could be studied from an information-theoretic perspective: calculation of channel capacity, Gallager’s coding bound and LLR generation are all topics of significant interest to the flash community.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We gratefully acknowledge Urs Egger, from IBM Research – Zurich, for designing the characterization platform used in this work, and the Solid State Technology Development team at IBM Systems and Technology Group for their support with flash devices and parts. Special thanks to Evangelos Eleftheriou, from IBM Research – Zurich, for his support of this work.

Fig. 6. BER performance of parameterized model
REFERENCES
[1] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, 2011.
[2] J. Moon, J. No, S. Lee et al., “Statistical characterization of noise and interference in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2153–2164, 2013.
[3] B. Peleato and R. Agarwal, “Maximizing MLC NAND lifetime and reliability in the presence of write noise,” in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2012, pp. 3752–3756.
[4] Y. Cai, E. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in 2013 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE), 2013, pp. 1285–1290.
[5] C. Compagnoni, M. Ghidotti, A. Lacaita et al., “Random telegraph noise effect on the programmed threshold-voltage distribution of flash memories,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 984–986, 2009.
[6] D.-H. Lee and W. Sung, “Decision directed estimation of threshold voltage distribution in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 919–927, Feb 2014.
[7] M. Helm, J.-K. Park, A. Ghalam et al., “A 128Gb MLC NAND-Flash device using 16nm planar cell,” in 2014 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, Digest of Technical Papers, 2014, pp. 326–327.
[8] R.-A. Cernea, L. Pham et al., “A 34 MB/s MLC write throughput 16 Gb NAND with all bit line architecture on 56 nm technology,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 186–194, January 2009.
[9] S. Aritome, “NAND Flash innovations,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Magazine, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 21–29, 2013.
[10] B. Park, S. Cho, M. Park et al., “Challenges and limitations of NAND flash memory devices based on floating gates,” in 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, May 2012, pp. 420–423.
[11] J.-D. Lee, J.-H. Choi et al., “Effects of interface trap generation and annihilation on the data retention characteristics of flash memory cells,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 110–117, March 2004.
[12] J.-D. Lee, S.-H. Hur, and J.-D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[13] N. Mielke, H. Belgal, I. Kalastirsky et al., “Flash EEPROM threshold instabilities due to charge trapping during program/erase cycling,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 335–344, May 2004.
[14] J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, “A simplex method for function minimization,” The Computer Journal, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 308–313, 1965.
[15] W. Reed and M. Jorgensen, “The double Pareto-lognormal distribution a new parametric model for size distributions,” Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods, vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1733–1753, 2004.
[16] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun et al., “LDPC-in-SSD: making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. of the 11th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST), 2013, pp. 243–256.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on2J3un5e624,2026 at 17:41:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

