IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

2065

Reliability-Based Iterative Decoding Algorithm for LDPC Codes With Low Variable-Node Degree
J. M. Català-Pérez, F. García-Herrero, J. Valls, Member, IEEE, K. Liu, and S. Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, a new reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding (RBI-MLGD) algorithm that computes the extrinsic information of previous iterations of the variable node is proposed. This decoding algorithm is called historicalextrinsic reliability-based iterative decoder (HE-RBID) and improves the bit-error-rate performance of the previous RBI-MLGD. HE-RBID is particularly interesting for codes with a low degree of variable node, where traditional RBI-MLGD algorithms do not provide a good behavior. HE-RBID ensures a good performance without searching for the minimum at the check node and only by exchanging 1-bit messages between variable and check nodes.
Index Terms—Low-density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, decoding, bit-flipping, historical-extrinsic reliability-based iterative decoder (HE-RBID).
I. INTRODUCTION
R ELIABILITY-based iterative majority-logic decoding (RBI-MLGD) algorithms [1], [2] for Low-density ParityCheck (LDPC) codes represent a very interesting type of alternatives to decoders derived from the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3] due to several reasons. The first one is that majority-logic decoders do not require soft information based on channel information at each iteration. Unlike SPA or minsum algorithm [4], majority-logic algorithms do not compute soft-decision information at the check-node, they only perform hard-decision operations which reduce significantly the overall complexity. The second reason is that the message exchanged between variable-node and check-node is of just one bit: the bit estimation done in the different edges. This advantage has a great impact when the decoder is implemented in hardware, as more than 80% of the delay and hence 80% of the speed is limited by routing [5], and routing is proportional to the number of bits of the exchanged messages.
Despite the previously mentioned advantages, majority-logic decoders have also some serious limitations: i) the bit-error rate (BER) performance and; ii) the degree distribution of the code to be decoded. For codes with a construction method based
Manuscript received May 29, 2014; revised September 14, 2014; accepted October 2, 2014. Date of publication October 15, 2014; date of current version December 8, 2014. This work was supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación under Grant TEC2011-27916. The work of J. M. CatalàPérez was supported by an FPI grant under Grant BES-2012-052130. The work of F. García-Herrero was supported by an FPU grant sponsored by the Spanish Ministerio de Educación under Grant AP2010-5178. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was H. Saeedi.
J. M. Català-Pérez, F. García-Herrero, and J. Valls are with the iTEAM, at Universitat Politècnica de València, 46730 Gandia, Spain (e-mail: joacape@. upv.es; fragarh2@.upv.es; jvalls@.upv.es).
K. Liu and S. Lin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: kkeliu@ucdavis.edu; shulin@ucdavis.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2014.2363112

on Euclidean Geometry (EG codes) [6], the performance is very close to SPA and min-sum algorithm [1], as EG ones are majority-logic decodable codes. However, when codes with different kinds of construction methods [7]–[9] are decoded with RBI-MLGD algorithms (even when the degree distribution is similar to an EG code) a notable performance loss in the BER curve is introduced. This performance loss can be greater than 1.5 dB compared to min-sum algorithm. On the other hand, the degree distribution is crucial if RBI-MLGD algorithms are to be used. If the variable-node degree (dv) is not large enough (at least dv = 10) the RBI-MLGD is not able to correct most of the errors, introducing an early degradation at a BER higher than 10−5 [2], which makes it impractical for most modern communication or storage systems. The two previous problems prevent majority-logic algorithms from being applied in many systems, due to the fact that the hardware implementations of decoders usually prefer low dv.
To overcome the two above-mentioned problems, a new RBI-MLGD algorithm called reliability-based iterative minsum decoding (RBI-MSD) was proposed in [2] introducing some extra soft-information processing at the check-node by means of looking for the minimum reliability at the check-node and using it to modulate the amplitude of the majority-logic information. Even obtaining a good performance, RBI-MSD has two drawbacks: i) the check-node processing does not only involve hard-decision operations; and ii) the message-passing depends on a minimum value, which cannot be quantized with only one bit. To sum up, RBI-MSD algorithm has a complexity close to min-sum algorithm and does not introduce any of the above-mentioned advantages of the majority-logic decoders.
In this paper a new RBI-MLGD algorithm that avoids the early performance degradation for codes with low dv is introduced. This proposal is named as historical-extrinsic reliabilitybased iterative decoder (HE-RBID) because it makes use of the extrinsic information of the variable-nodes from all the previous iterations to keep a good waterfall behavior. Moreover, HE-RBID algorithm keeps the two advantages of RBI-MLGD algorithms: computing only hard-decision information at the check-node and processing one-bit messages.
The rest of the paper is structured in the following sections: Section II makes a brief summary of the main RBI-MLGD algorithms; Section III describes the newly proposed HE-RBID algorithm; Section IV introduces a discussion about complexity and performance of the different RBI-MLGD algorithms including the new HE-RBID; and finally, in Section V conclusions are outlined.
II. RBI-MLGD ALGORITHMS
Let H be the M × N parity check matrix with entries hi,j that defines an (N, K) LDPC code. Ni and Mj are described

1089-7798 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/3in5d:4e4x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

2066

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

as the sets that consist of the indices of all the non-zero elements iterations (Step 5). The purpose of the votes is trying to correct

of the row i (check-node) and a column j (variable-node)
respectively. The size of the sets Ni and Mj are the degree
of check-node (dc) and the degree of variable-node (dv). The codeword c satisfies the equation c · HT = 0. K is the length

or validate the channel information (Q(yj)) depending on the number of parity check-nodes that are unsatisfied.
The algorithm stops when a maximum number of iterations is reached or all the syndromes are equal to zero (tentative

in terms of bits of the information.

decoding step).

The codeword c is modulated in binary phase-shift keying The first important idea derived from RBI-MLGD is that

(BPSK) and transmitted over an additive white Gaussian noise the message-passing of this algorithm is binary. As it can be

(AWGN) channel. The received soft-decision sequence is de- seen the information from check-node to variable-node are

noted by y = (y0, y1, . . . , yN−1), with y = x + e, where e is the candidate bits σi,j, and the variable-node to check-node

the noise vector introduced by the channel and x = 2c − 1.

messages are the hard-decision bits zj. This is important to keep

In Algorithm 1 the RBI-MLGD from [1] is described. The complexity low and reduce routing (increase speed) in hardware

algorithm is divided into three main parts: i) initialization; implementations [5].

ii) check-node update; and iii) variable-node update.

The second important idea that can be extracted from

Algorithm 1 is that in the iterative process two different do-

Algorithm 1: RBI-MLGD

mains are mixed: the soft-information from the channel and the votes. The votes, which are mapped in the case of RBI-

Input: Rj(0) = Q(yj), with j ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1} Iterative process

MLGD algorithm to +1 and −1, are an abstract representation of the reliability of a decision based on the check-node information. In some cases, this uncorrelation between the vote

for k = 0 → Itmax − 1 do Check-node update

and the channel information introduces performance loss. For this reason, authors from [2] proposed a modified RBI-MLGD

1

zj(k) =

1, if Rj(k) ≥ 0 , j ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1} 0, otherwise

(MRBI-MLGD) algorithm trying to solve this problem. The differences between MRBI-MLGD and RBI-MLGD are

2

si(k) =

⊕zj(k)hi,j =

⊕zj(k), i ∈ {0, . . . ,

0≤j≤N −1

j∈Ni

located at the variable-node update equations. In order to match the concept of the votes with the information from the channel

M − 1}

the authors of [2] introduce a scaling factor α in Step 4. This

3

σi(,kj) =

⊕zj(k) = s(ik) ⊕ zj(k), i ∈ {0, . . . , M −1}

j ∈Ni\j

scaling factor compensates the differences between the channel information and the constant amplitude of the votes, trying

Tentative decoding

to balance the importance of the hard-decision information

if (s(k) = 0) then {SKIP}

(σi,j from the check-node) and the soft-decision (received y

Variable-node update

sequence). Moreover, Step 5 is also modified as indicated

4

ξj(k) =

(2σi(,kj) − 1), j ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1};

i∈Mj

5

Rj(k+1) = Rj(k) + ξj(k), j ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1}

end

Output: z

in (1).

Rj(k+1) = Rj(0) + ξj(k), j ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1}.

(1)

This modification introduces an improvement of the coding gain as the ratio “votes-soft input” is closer to the one found in

the min-sum algorithm because it mimics the update performed

For the initialization, the RBI-MLGD quantize the received vectors by using the Q function. The Q function saturates the maximum amplitudes of the received sequence and normalizes
them by performing a division by Δ (for more details we refer to [2]). The output of the Q function is taken as reliability information to initialize the variable-nodes at iteration zero (Rj(0)).
During the check-node update the syndromes of the M parity
check equations are computed. If the parity check equations are
satisfied (si = 0 in Step 2) the new estimated bits are equal to the old ones (σi,j = zj, Step 3) otherwise the estimated bits are flipped (σi,j = si ⊕ zj = 1 ⊕ zj, Step 3). Note that ⊕ is the XOR operation. These new estimated bits (σi,j) can be interpreted as candidates in the voting process performed by

in turbo decoders in which the output of a variable-node is Q(yi) plus the information from the check-node [2].
Unfortunately, MRBI-MLGD does not solve the problem of working with codes with a degree distribution of low dv. As it is shown in [2] MRBI-MLGD algorithm introduces an important degradation in performance not being able to reach a bit error rate below 10−3 when the degree of variable-node is low. The alternative proposed in [2] to avoid an early performance degradation consists in introducing soft-information and transforming the one-bit message-passing decoder into an integer message-passing decoder, RBI-MSD, increasing complexity.
III. HE-RBID ALGORITHM

the majority-logic at the variable-nodes.

The more soft-decision is included in the check-node, the

At the variable-node σi,j is transformed from bits to votes. better in the waterfall region is. This is the strategy followed According to Step 4 in Algorithm 1, the amplitude of the vote by the RBI-MSD algorithm, which uses integer reliability in-

will be −1 if σi,j = 0, and it will be +1 if σi,j = 1. Depending on the majority vote, ξj will have the same sign as zj or not. The recount of the votes (ξj) is added to Rj, which stores the channel information (Q(yj)) and the votes in the previous

formation in the check-node updates. However, the lack of softdecision information in the check-node update does not justify that RBI-MLGD algorithms introduce some early performance degradation when the degree of the variable-node is low. We

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:35:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CATALÀ-PÉREZ et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHM FOR LDPC CODES WITH VARIABLE-NODE DEGREE
TABLE I COMPLEXITY PER ITERATION FOR DIFFERENT LDPC DECODING ALGORITHMS

2067

assume that the degradation of performance from RBI-MLGD algorithms is due to the lack of extrinsic information in the variable-node update. Therefore, we introduce here the new idea of considering hard-decision votes as soft-decision ones and extract from them the extrinsic information at the variablenode (hard-decision extrinsic (H-Ex) computation). To the best knowledge of the authors, this idea has not been considered before.

σi(,kj) =

⊕zi(,kj) = si(k) ⊕ zi(,kj), i ∈ {0, . . . , M − 1}

j ∈Ni\j
(4)

ξi(,kj) =α

2σi(k,j) − 1 , j ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1}

(5)

i ∈Mj \i

Ri(,kj+1) =Ri(,kj) + ξi(,kj), i ∈ {0, . . . , M − 1}, j ∈ Ni

(6)

The H-Ex method was tested with both variable-node updat-

ing rules: 1) the one followed by the RBI-MLGD in which the historical-reliability data is taken into account accumulating the

IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS AND COMPLEXITY

votes of all the previous iterations; and 2) the one followed by the MRBI-MLGD in which only the initial reliability is added to the newly updated sum of votes, emulating the turbo decoder update (Tu-DU). The scaling factor α is required in all combinations to maintain a balance of the voting information and the incoming soft input from the channel.
The proposal from this letter is that each hard-decision at the check-node is also a one-bit message as in the RBI-MLGD algorithms, but in this case is made based on the extrinsic information computed at the variable-node, Ri,j as in (2), where Ri(,kj=0) = Q(yj), with j ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1}, i ∈ Mj. Due to the computation of the extrinsic information, the reliability of

In Table I we include the complexity of RBI-MLGD, MRBIMLGD, HE-RBID and RBI-MSD algorithms in terms of number of operations per iteration. RBI-MLGD, MRBI-MLGD, HE-RBID and RBI-MSD involve the same number of binary operations; the main differences in complexity lies in the number of real-number additions/subtractions and comparisons.1 RBI-MSD needs the processing of dc − 2 comparisons at each edge of the code (remember that there are dc × M edges) which is similar to the complexity of min-sum algorithm from [4]. HE-RBID only duplicates the number of additions/subtractions because the H-Ex processing is required. Finally, it is important to remark once again that HE-RBID, RBI-MLGD and MRBI-

the hard-decision applied to calculate the check-node equations, MLGD only perform one-bit message passing, while RBI-MSD

as in (3) and (4), is increased. Moreover, the vote counting at the requires q-bit message passing, where usually q = 8 according

variable-node is extrinsic (H-Ex) as in (5), as for the edge ξi,j we only consider the information from the sets of check nodes i ∈ Mj\i. So if the edge (i, j) has one error, it does not affect to the edge itself. Finally, (6) considers the H-Ex information

to [2]. To have a reference of complexity of the mentioned algorithms, we enumerate the total number of operations per iteration (OPI) required for the codes whose BER performance are shown next.

from all the iterations, in other words, non Tu-DU is applied. Non Tu-DU ensures that the decoder is not ruled by the last vote information, but by the historical information of the H-Ex votes during all the previous iterations. This makes the algorithm converge slower than algorithms derived from SPA but improves the performance for codes with low dv. Performing a non Tu-DU we partially overcome the absence of a high number of check-nodes to take a reliable decision in one iteration by “remembering” the decision of a low number of check-nodes in a larger number of iterations. This algorithm is named as Historical-Extrinsic Reliability-Based Iterative Decoding (HERBID) and replaces steps 1 to 5 of Algorithm 1 with (2)–(6). To perform the tentative decoding, Rj is approximated by means of Ri,j, because with independence of the index i ∈ Mj selected, if the condition for early termination is satisfied, all the variable nodes have converged to the same solution in most of the cases, avoiding performance loss in the waterfall region.

• Code 1 (dc = 36, dv = 6, N = 2304, M = 256) Code construction: Algebraic LDPC [9] (M)RBI = 29 K OPI, RBI − MSD = 342 K OPI HE-RBID (α = 0.25) = 38 K OPI
• Code 2 (dc = 20, dv = 4, N = 2304, M = 384) Code construction: Wimax LDPC [10] (M)RBI = 24 K OPI, RBI − MSD = 162 K OPI HE − RBID (α = 0.75) = 32 K OPI
• Code 3 (dc = 32, dv = 6, N = 2048, M = 384) Code construction: Reed-Solomon based LDPC [8] (M)RBI = 38 K OPI, RBI − MSD = 406 K OPI HE − RBID (α = 0.375) = 50 K OPI
From the previous results we see that HE-RBID is around 33% more complex than (M)RBI-MLGD. On the other hand, RBI-MSD is heavily dependent on dc. Our proposal is between five and eight times less complex than RBI-MSD for Code 2 and 3 respectively.

zi(,kj) =

1, 0,

if Ri(,kj) ≥ 0 , otherwise

i ∈ {0, . . . , M − 1}, j ∈ Ni

(2)

s(ik) =

⊕zi(,kj)hi,j = ⊕ zi(,kj), i ∈ {0, . . . , M −1}

0≤j≤N −1

j∈Ni

(3)

For Code 1 (Fig. 1) and Code 2 (Fig. 2) we can see that HE-RBID reduces the early degradation at least two orders of magnitude compared to (M)RBI-MLGD with a reduction of complexity of 43% and 80% compared to RBI-MSD/min-sum
1Note that multiplications by the scaling factor α, which is constant, are omitted because they are negligible compared to the rest of the complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:35:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2068

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 1. BER performance of several LDPC decoding algorithms for Code 1. Fig. 3. BER performance of several LDPC decoding algorithms for Code 3.
complexity of min-sum algorithm at a cost of a performance loss (0.7–0.8 dB) in the waterfall. The proposed solution avoids the early performance degradation that RBI-MLGD and MRBIMLGD introduce with codes of low dv and non EG construction, while it does not increase complexity by more than 30% and the decoder is based in one-bit message-passing.

Fig. 2. BER performance of several LDPC decoding algorithms for Code 2.
at a cost of 0.7 dB and 0.8 dB of performance loss in the waterfall region respectively. With Code 3, HE-RBID introduces a performance loss of 0.7 dB at BER = 10−10 compared to min-sum algorithm but with a complexity reduction of 87% (Fig. 3). If we compare HE-RBID to (M)RBI-MLGD, the first one reduces the early degradation at BER = 10−6 to at least 10−10. In all the cases a decoding algorithm that combines TuDU and H-Ex computation show an early degradation that it is not practical for real applications. Also it is worth mentioning that the RBI-MSD and the min-sum algorithms require 2.5 less iterations at BER = 10−6 than the proposed HE-RBID to converge.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper a new RBI-MLGD algorithm is proposed. This algorithm, named as HE-RBID, reduces by 50%–87.5% the

REFERENCES
[1] Q. Huang, J. Kang, L. Zhang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Two reliability-based iterative majority-logic decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 3597–3606, Dec. 2009.
[2] H. Chen, K. Zhang, X. Ma, and B. Bai, “Comparisons between reliabilitybased iterative min-sum and majority-logic decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 1766–1771, Jul. 2011.
[3] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498– 519, Feb. 1998.
[4] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[5] A. Darabiha, A. Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Block-interlaced LDPC decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74–78, Jan. 2008.
[6] Q. Diao, W. Zhou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A transform approach for constructing quasi-cyclic Euclidean geometry LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, Feb. 2012, pp. 204–211.
[7] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[8] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-density parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[9] B. Zhou et al., “Construction of non-binary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes by arrays and array dispersions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1652–1662, Jun. 2009.
[10] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Std. 802.16-2009, May 29, 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:35:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

