GlobalSIP 2014: Data Flow Algorithms and Architecture for Signal Processing Systems
1
High-speed Multi-block-row Layered Decoding for Quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes
Xinmiao Zhang and Ying Tai SanDisk Corp.
{xinmiao.zhang, ying.tai}@sandisk.com

Abstract—Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes are used in numerous digital communication and storage systems. Layered LDPC decoding converges faster. To further increase the throughput, multiple block rows of the QC parity check matrix can be included in a layer. However, the maximum achievable clock frequency of the prior multi-block-row layered decoder is limited by the long critical path. This paper reformulates the involved equations so that the updating of the messages belonging to different block rows in a layer does not depend on any common intrinsic message. This enables the removal of one adder and one routing network from the critical path. As a result, the proposed design can reach substantially higher clock frequency than prior design, and achieves effective throughputarea tradeoff.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are adopted for forward error-correction in many communication and storage systems due to their capacity-approaching performance. The parity check matrix of a quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC code [1] consists of square sub-matrixes, each of which is zero or a cyclically shifted identity matrix. Because of this regularity, QC-LDPC codes enable more efficient hardware implementations than other LDPC codes.
The layered technique [2] can speed up the convergence of LDPC decoding. In layered decoding, the rows of the parity check matrix, H, are divided into segments, also called layers. Instead of updating the messages once in each iteration, the messages derived from the decoding of a layer are used to update the messages for the decoding of the next layer. Since the messages get updated more often, it takes fewer iterations to find the codeword. The number of clock cycles needed for a decoding iteration is proportional to the number of layers and the decoding latency of each layer. Traditionally, in the layered decoding of QC-LDPC codes, each layer consists of one block row of sub-matrixes of H, and one block column is processed at a time within the decoding of a layer. For codes whose row and/or column weight is not small, this setting may not achieve throughput in the order of several Gbps as required in applications such as WLAN, WiMax and Flash memory. To increase the throughput, multiple block columns can be processed at a time in each layer, and multiple block rows can be put into a layer. This paper focuses on including multiple block rows in a layer, in which case the message updating rule is a non-trivial extension. A multi-block-row layered decoding scheme was proposed in [3]. However, because a common

intrinsic message is used to update the messages to different block rows in a layer, the critical path of this design is long and the maximum achievable clock frequency is limited.
Through reformulating the message updating equations, this paper proposes a novel multi-block-row layered decoding scheme and corresponding VLSI implementation architectures. The proposed scheme does not require any common intrinsic message to be shared in the updating of the messages to different block rows in a layer. As a result, fewer messages are added up for updating each message, and the critical path has fewer adders. This feature also enables the combining of the routing networks between the check and variable node units to further shorten the critical path. For an example QCLDPC code whose H matrix has row weight 16 and consists of sub-matrixes of dimension 128×128, the proposed decoder with two block rows included in a layer can reach 26% higher clock frequency than that in [3] with 23% area overhead. The proposed design achieves effective throughput-area tradeoff.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces prior layered decoding methods. The proposed layered decoding and implementation architectures are detailed in Section III. Section IV provides complexity analysis before conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. LAYERED DECODING FOR QC-LDPC CODES
An LDPC code is defined by a very sparse parity check matrix H or the corresponding Tanner graph. Each row (column) of H corresponds to a check (variable) node in the Tanner graph. A nonzero entry in H translates to an edge connecting the corresponding check and variable nodes. LDPC codes can be decoded by belief propagation or its approximations, such as the Min-sum algorithm [4]. In these algorithms, probability messages are passed through the edges in the Tanner graph iteratively. Each decoding iteration has two major steps, check node processing that computes checkto-variable (c2v) messages and variable node processing that updates variable-to-check (v2c) messages. The iterations are repeated until a codeword is found or the maximum iteration number is reached. Although different decoding algorithms of LDPC codes have various check node processing schemes, they share the same variable node processing. Let γn be the information from the channel for variable node n represented in log-likelihood ratio. Denote the v2c message from variable node n to check node m in iteration j by um (j),n, and the c2v message from check node m to variable node n in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:37:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4799-7088-9/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

11

GlobalSIP 2014: Data Flow Algorithms and Architecture for Signal Processing Systems
2

iteration j − 1 by vm(j,−n1). Let Sc(n) be the set of check nodes

connected to variable node n. node processing computes u(mj),n

Conventio∑nally, = γn + i∈Sc

the variable (n)\m vi(,jn−1)

once in each iteration. In layered decoding [2], the rows of H

are divided into segments, also called layers. The c2v messages

computed from the decoding of a layer are used to update the

v2c messages for the decoding of the next layer right away.

Since the v2c messages are updated more often, it takes fewer

iterations for the decoding to converge.

Traditionally, in layered decoding of QC-LDPC codes, each

layer consists of one block row of sub-matrixes of H. In

this case, there is at most one c2v message for each variable

node during the decoding of a layer. Denote the v2c and c2v messages for block row l in decoding iteration j by u(j,l) and v(j,l), respectively. For brevity, the variable and check node

indexes, m and n, are omitted. The v2c messages for one-

block-row layered decoding can be generated as [2]

u(j,l+1) = (u(j,l) + v(j,l)) − v(j−1,l+1).

(1)

γ is used as u(0,0). After that, it is incorporated in the updated v2c messages and does not need to be stored.
Due to the data dependency, the decoding of the next layer can not start until that of the current layer is completed. Multiple block columns within each layer can be processed at a time at the cost of more complicated check node units (CNUs) to speed up the decoding of each layer. To further increase the throughput, layered decoding that processes multiple blocks of rows simultaneously is necessary. Nevertheless, in this case, the updating of a v2c message would depend on multiple c2v messages, and the updating formula is a non-trivial extension from (1). In the multi-block-row layered decoding scheme in [3], the v2c messages are computed through updating an intrinsic message L, which is initialized as γ. Assume that each layer consists of p block rows of H. To derive u(j,pi+k) for k = 0, 1, . . . , p − 1, L is first updated as [3]

∑ p−1 (

)

L⇐L+

v(j,p(i−1)+k) − v(j−1,p(i−1)+k) . (2)

k=0

Then the v2c messages are computed by

u(j,pi+k) = L − v(j−1,pi+k).

(3)

The subtraction of each pair of messages in (2) can be done in parallel. The differences and L can be added up by a tree structure. However, the subtractions in (3) put another adder in the data path. Hence, although sharing L reduces the total number of additions/subtractions, it also increases the data path. In addition, as it will be shown in the next section, sharing L also leads to more routing networks in the critical path. The message computations are done in a feedback loop in LDPC decoders. Longer critical path means longer clock period or more pipelining stages.

III. HIGH-SPEED MULTI-BLOCK-ROW LAYERED DECODER
A novel multi-block-row layered decoding scheme is proposed next. Compared to the approach in [3], the proposed scheme has much shorter critical path, and hence can achieve substantially higher clock frequency and throughput.

channel info.

memory
Rout. buffer

memory
Rout.

CNUs

CNUs

Rout.

Rout.

L
Fig. 1. A 2-block-row layered decoder architecture using the scheme in [3]

In layered decoding, the v2c messages for a block row

should be the sum of the channel information and the most

updated c2v messages from all other block rows. By keeping

track of the most updated c2v messages, and reformulating the

equations involving the v2c messages of the previous layer, the

v2c message updating can done alternatively as

(

)

u(j,pi+k) = u(j,p(i−1)+k) − v(j,p(i−1)+k)

∑ p−1 (

)

+

v(j,p(i−1)+l) − v(j−1,p(i−1)+l) (4)

l=0,l≠ k

− v(j−1,pi+k)

for k = 0, 1, . . . , p−1. The v2c messages computed according to (4) are exactly the same as those from (2) and (3), and there is no performance loss. The subtraction for each pair of messages in (4) can be also carried out in parallel. It takes p−1 additions and one subtraction afterwards to derive u(j,pi+k) according to (4). Comparatively, p additions are needed to compute L in (2), after which another subtraction is required as in (3) to compute each v2c message. Hence, the proposed v2c message updating according to (4) has one less adder in the critical path. On the other hand, it should be noted that only one subtraction is required to derive each v2c message as in (3) after L is calculated. Although some computations in the second term of (4) can be shared, the total number of additions and subtractions needed to update all v2c messages in the proposed approach is larger.
The proposed v2c message updating also leads to fewer routing networks in the critical path. To simplify the illustration, consider the case of p = 2. The 2-block-row layered decoder using the scheme in [3] can be implemented by the architecture in Fig. 1. The two groups of CNUs take care of the check node processing for even and odd block rows. Since the nonzero entries appear at different locations in each submatrix, routing networks are needed to send the v2c messages to correct CNUs. The computed c2v messages are also stored in memory to be used in the calculations of later layers. Each pair of messages involved in the subtraction in (2) are c2v messages of the same row but different iterations. Hence, no reverse routing is needed before the subtraction is carried out.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:37:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
12

GlobalSIP 2014: Data Flow Algorithms and Architecture for Signal Processing Systems
3

memory 2's comp. to sign-mag. memory sign-mag.to 2's comp.

memory

um,n

|um,n|

D

min1

compare

compare

min2
D

vm,n

n

D idx

=n?

sign(um,n)

D
sign product

Fig. 2. Proposed high-speed 2-block-row layered decoder architecture

Fig. 3. The CNU architecture for Min-sum decoder processing one block column at a time

However, reverse routing is necessary to align the results of

the subtractions before they are added up with L. Similarly, no permutation is required on v(j−1,pi+k) to compute u(j,pi+k) in

(3) as long as the intrinsic messages L are routed according to

block row pi + k. As a result, the critical path of the 2-block-

row layered decoder illustrated in Fig. 1 has 4 adders and 2

routing networks beside the units in the CNUs. The critical

path is shown by the dashed line in the figure.

Denote the two block rows in a layer by even and odd rows.

(4) is simplified as

(

)

u(j,even) = u(j,even−2) − v(j,even−2) +

(

)

v(j,odd−2) − v(j−1,odd−2) − v(j−1,even)

(

)

u(j,odd) = u(j,odd−2) − v(j,odd−2)

(

)

+ v(j,even−2) − v(j−1,even−2) − v(j−1,odd)

(5)

Accordingly, a 2-block-row layered decoder using the proposed scheme can be implemented as shown in Fig. 2. The inputs to the CNUs, u(j,even−2) and u(j,odd−2), are held in buffers until they are consumed in the subtractions when v(j,even−2) and v(j,odd−2) are available at the outputs of the CNUs. The differences of the four pairs of messages in (5) are computed by the four shaded subtractors in Fig. 2. Similarly, the messages in each pair belong to the same block row of H, and hence routing networks are not required at the inputs of the subtractors. Nevertheless, the differences need to be permuted to align with each other before they are added up. Four routing networks are included for this purpose. They do not generate c2v messages for variable nodes in the order of 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . . Instead, the messages are permuted according to the locations of the nonzero entries in block row even and odd. In this case, no additional routing is needed for aligning the messages in the rest of the computations in (5). It can be considered that the four routing networks implement combined functions of reverse routing for block row even−2 and odd−2, and routing for block row even and odd. Combining routing functions only requires the control signals of the multiplexors to be changed, and does not cause hardware overhead. In the design of [3] shown in Fig. 1, the intrinsic message L is shared

in the updating of different v2c messages. Hence, the reverse routing and routing networks can not be combined in the same way. Comparing Fig. 1 and 2, the proposed decoder also has one less routing network in the critical path. The channel information is used as the v2c messages for the first layer in the first decoding iteration. Its routing for the first layer is done by sharing existing networks in our design.
IV. COMPLEXITY ANALYSES AND COMPARISONS
Compared to the 2-block-row layered decoder in Fig. 1, the proposed design in Fig. 2 has one less adder and one less routing network in the critical path. On the other hand, it requires more computation units and buffers. Consider a QC-LDPC code whose H matrix consists of r × t cyclic permutation matrixes with dimension e×e. The complexity of the proposed design is analyzed and compared in this section by taking a Min-sum decoder [4] that processes one block column at a time within the decoding of each layer as an example.
The CNU architecture for the Min-sum decoder is available in many publications and is drawn in Fig. 3. For the processing of check node m, the CNU finds the minimum (min1) and second minimum (min2) magnitudes, the index of the minimum magnitude (idx), and the sign product of all um,n with n ∈ Sv(m). Here Sv(m) is the set of all variable nodes connected to check node m. These values and the sign of each um,n can be stored as compressed c2v messages to reduce the memory requirement. Then |vm,n| equals min1 if n ≠ idx, and is min2 otherwise. Also the sign of vm,n is simply the XOR of the sign product and the sign of um,n. Since the additions and subtractions in the decoder are done using 2’s complement representation, converters to and from signmagnitude representation are added to the input and output. When the word length w = 5, the critical path of the CNU has around 13 2-input logic gates.
Using a ripple-carry architecture, a w-bit adder is implemented by w full adders concatenated serially. Each full adder requires 6 logic gates and has 2 gates in the data path. Hence, the critical path of a w-bit adder has 2w gates. Moreover, the addition can start when the least significant bits of the operands are available, and does not have to wait until all input bits are ready. Therefore, if the output of an adder is used by another

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:37:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
13

GlobalSIP 2014: Data Flow Algorithms and Architecture for Signal Processing Systems
4

u(0,0)u(0,1) u(0,2)u(0,3) u(1,0)u(1,1) u(1,2)u(1,3) u(2,0)u(2,1) u(2,2)u(2,3)

v(0,0)v(0,1)

v(1,2)v(1,3)

v(0,2)v(0,3)

v(2,0)v(2,1)

time

v(1,0)v(1,1)

Fig. 4. Storage of c2v messages when p = 2 and r = 4

as an input, the second adder only leads to 2 extra logic gates in the overall data path. The routing between the variable and check nodes corresponding to a e×e cyclic permutation matrix can be implemented as an e-input barrel shifter. It consists of e log2 e w-bit 2-to-1 multiplexors, and the data path has log2 e multiplexors. Considering the 13 gates in the data path of the CNUs, the critical path of the proposed decoder in Fig. 2 has 2w + 2 × 2 + log2 e + 1 + 13 gates, while that of the decoder in Fig. 1 has 2w + 2 × 3 + 2 log2 e + 1 + 13 gates. When e = 128 and w = 5, the proposed design achieves 26% higher clock frequency. If the data path is pipelined, the proposed design leads to fewer pipelining stages, and hence fewer number of clock cycles for the decoding of each layer. In addition, the latency reduction achievable by the proposed scheme becomes more significant as the row weight of the code decreases.
The proposed decoder requires two more sets of adders and one more buffer than that in Fig. 1. The complexity of each adder and CNU is the same in the two decoders. The buffers hold the messages until they are consumed in the additions or subtractions with the outputs of the CNUs. When one block column is processed at a time, the check node processing of a layer takes t clock cycles. If the decoders is not pipelined, the size of each buffer is e(t+1)w bits in both decoders. However, the messages to be buffered, L, in Fig. 1 go through a longer path that has two more routing networks and two more adders than that in Fig. 2 before they are consumed. If this path is cut into ξ pipelining stages, the buffer in Fig. 1 needs to store eξw more bits.
Taking the case of p = 2 and r = 4 as an example. The c2v messages needed to be recorded during the decoding process using the proposed design are shown in Fig. 4. After the v2c messages for a layer are input block column after block column to the CNUs, the c2v messages are derived. The thin dark bars in Fig. 4 denote the time instances that the messages are written to the memory. They are held in the memory until no longer needed for any computation. At that time, the memory cells are freed and can be used to store other messages. It can be derived from Fig. 4 that a c2v message is needed in the decoding of the next l + 1 layers, if the total number of layers is l. Therefore, the memory needs to be able to hold the c2v messages for l + 1 layers. Using similar analysis, the size of the memory required by the decoder in Fig. 1 is the same.
The complexity of the proposed decoder is summarized in Table I. Each set of the compressed c2v message has 2w + log2 t + 1 + t bits. r is small, and t usually does not exceed dozens. For such short depth, the memory and buffer are implemented more efficiently using registers. Assume that

TABLE I COMPLEXITIES OF 2-BLOCK-ROW LAYERED DECODERS WITH WORD LENGTH w = 5 FOR A QC-LDPC CODE WHOSE H MATRIX HAS r × t
CYCLICAL PERMUTATION MATRIXES OF DIMENSION e × e

# of adders # of routers # of CNUs memory (# of comp. c2v msg.) buffer (bits)
critical path (# of gates) # of clks/layer

[3]
6e 4 2e 2e(r/2 + 1) e(t + 1)w
2w + 2 log2 e + 20 t+1

Proposed
8e 4 2e 2e(r/2 + 1) 2e(t + 1)w
2w + log2 e + 18 t+1

each register takes around 3 times the area of an XOR gate. It can be analyzed that the proposed design requires around 214k logic gates to implement, while that from [3] needs 174k for a QC-LDPC code with r = 4 and t = 16. Therefore, the proposed design can reach 26% higher speed at the cost of 23% larger area. The major area penalty of the proposed design comes from the extra buffer. Hence, the area overhead decreases substantially with t. When t = 8, the area overhead becomes 19%. Since there are log2 e levels of multiplexors in each routing network, the achievable speedup of our design would become slightly more significant for larger e.
When pipelining is adopted to cut the data path into shorter segments, our design is still faster than that in [3] because fewer pipelining stages are needed. The speedup would be more significant when the row weight is smaller. In addition, when pipelined, the buffer size in prior design is larger, and hence the area overhead of our design would be smaller.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented a high-speed multi-block-row layered decoding scheme for QC-LDPC codes. By reformulating the v2c message updating equations, the critical path of the proposed design has one less adder although the total number of adders has been increased. Also the reformulated message updating enables the removal of one routing network from the critical path. As a result, the proposed decoder can achieve substantially higher throughput than prior design at the cost of larger area. Although the proposed scheme was explained by using the Min-sum algorithm for binary LDPC codes in this paper, it can be also applied to other decoding algorithms and non-binary LDPC codes.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Zhou, et. al, ”Construction of non-binary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes by arrays and array dispersions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1652-1662, Jun. 2009.
[2] M. Mansour, and N. Shanbhag, ”A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE Journ. of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684-698, 2006.
[3] Y. Sun, G. Wang and J. Cavallaro, ”Multi-layer parallel decoding algorithm and VLSI architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Circuits and Syst., pp. 1776-1779, May 2011.
[4] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, ”Density ecolution for two improved BPbased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commu. Letters, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208-210, May 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:37:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
14

