On the Construction of LDPC Convolutional Code Ensembles based on Permuted Circulant Unit Matrices
Fotios Gioulekas*, Constantinos Petrou†, Athanasios Vgenis‡, Michael Birbas‡
*Subdirectorate of Informatics, University General Hospital of Larissa, 41110, Greece †DE P&I Sens Leveling, ASML Netherlands BV, De Run 6501, 5504 DR Veldhoven, The Netherlands
‡Analogies S.A., Patras Science Park, Patras, Greece, 26504 Email: gioulekas@uhl.gr, constantinos.petrou@asml.com,{athanasios.vgenis, michael.birbas}@analogies.eu

Abstract— In this paper, a construction methodology for ensembles of Low-Density Parity-Check Convolutional Codes (LDPC-CCs) based on permuted circulant unit matrices is proposed. The proposed method directly generates the syndrome former matrices according to specified code parameters and constraints i.e. code-rate, degree-distribution, constraint length, period and memory, in contrast to the majority of the available methodologies that produce relevant error-correcting codes based on either block ones, protographs or spatially-coupled type of codes. Simulation results show that the constructed ensembles demonstrate advanced error-correcting capability of up to 0.5 dB in terms of frame-error and bit-error rates at the convergence region, when compared to the performance of Forward Error Correction schemes adopted by various wireless standards, with comparable hardware complexity even at short codeword-lengths.
Keywords— Low-density parity-check codes, convolutional
codes, construction method, permuted circulant unit matrices
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPCCCs) are defined by a sparse semi-infinite transposed parity check matrix, denoted as HT (syndrome former matrix). The encoding and decoding procedures can be viewed as sliding through time, thus exhibiting convolutional features. LDPC-CCs were initially considered for streaming applications [1], while their application to frame-based applications have firstly been considered, mainly due to the fact that they can encode and decode arbitrary lengths of data [2] supporting variable frame sizes. For fixed codeword lengths, LDPC-CCs have extremely strong error-correcting capabilities at the beginning of the frame, due to the known state (zero-state) of the encoder upon the beginning of transmission. However, this feature is not applicable to the end of the frame. Therefore, performance correction is employed, by transmitting some extra guard bits, called termination bits, which consequently results in rate loss. With careful design, rate-loss could be minimized and traded-off by the gain in performance and hardware complexity.
Various methods for constructing LDPC-CC syndrome formers have been proposed in the literature over the past few years. A pioneering method was proposed to produce semi-

regular, time-varying syndrome formers from randomly constructed block codes [1]. A similar method was proposed for constructing irregular, time-varying syndrome formers from randomly constructed irregular block codes [3]. Structured methods for construction of LDPC-CCs based on quasi-cyclic block codes have also been proposed [4], [5]. Spatially-coupled LDPC codes proposed recently [6] demonstrate high performance over a large class of point-topoint channels. This type of code is derived by a graphical model that can be spatially coupled in order to generate a larger graphical model which "locally" has identical statistical properties but which "globally" performs much better under iterative processing.
All the aforementioned construction methods are based on constructing LDPC block codes (BCs) first with good properties, and then obtaining the equivalent LDPC-CC syndrome former matrices. While it is conjectured that girth properties are preserved in some cases, i.e. [5], there is no proof that this property holds for other construction methods, especially when an append operation is used to ensure fast encoding, e.g., [3], adding extra connections to the matrix. To the best of our knowledge, only recently has a construction method of Time-varying LDPC-CCs with small periods (T=2,3) been proposed, operating directly on the LDPC-CC syndrome former [7] by randomly isolating syndrome formers that satisfy the parity-check equation for the all-one code word, and choosing those with good error-correction properties. However, this construction method is limited to certain code rates and small periods.
The scope of this work is four-fold. First, a construction method [8] that can generate syndrome formers of arbitrary rate, memory and period, directly acting on the syndrome former, rather than working on an underlying block code is shown. Second, the incorporation within this construction method of tools previously proposed for LDPC-BC construction methods that guarantee good error-correcting properties are described. The third target is to construct structural syndrome formers that are hardware-efficient. The fourth target is to directly compare LDPC-CC codes against

978-1-4799-4242-8/14/$31.00 c 2014 IEEE

407

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:37:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LDPC-BC ones for certain block lengths taking into account in the same time comparison parameters such as complexity, latency, error-correcting capability and rate-loss (based on the comparison in [9] that is performed based on checking individually each one of the code aspects using different cases of LDPC-CC codes and LDPC block codes). Within this context, this article is organized as follows. In Section II, the proposed construction method is described in detail. Section III is devoted to the description of the memory elements used in encoding and decoding. Section IV shows the bit-error and frame-error results comparisons with existing construction methods, and complexity assessments while Section V concludes the work.

II. RANDOM CONSTRUCTION METHOD BASED ON PERMUTED CIRCULANT UNIT MATRICES
Due to the periodicity of LDPC-CC codes, the semiinfinite transposed parity-check matrix can be fully described by one of its periods [1]. Any period having full degree for all variable nodes, is called the equivalent syndrome former (for simplicity reasons it will be simply called syndrome former in this paper). Any period having full degree for all check nodes, is called the equivalent check-node syndrome former. The equivalent check-node syndrome former can be viewed as a finite-size block code.The syndrome former of an LDPC-CC code with code rate b/c, code period T, and code memory ms can be viewed as a finite-size block code. The physical size of the syndrome former is c·T×(c-b)·(ms+T), with non-zero elements permitted only in its central diagonal zone. In terms of element indices, the zone in which non-zero elements are permitted is defined as from element (1,1) up to element (1,(cb)·(ms+1)) for the first phase, and then for the next phases, in steps of c elements downwards and c-b elements to the right, always containing (c-b)·(ms+1) potentially non-zero matrix elements per row.The proposed construction method is summarized as follows [8]: For each phase, populate the rows of the syndrome former by inserting randomly permuted c×c unit matrices in random locations, until the variable degree is satisfied, provided a number of criteria are met. This method is suitable for constructing LDPC-CCs with the same variable node degree for all c variable nodes per phase and irregular check degree distribution.
The algorithm starts from defining the desired rate (b/c), memory (ms), period (T), degree distribution list (dv, dc), and ACE (Approximate Cycle Extrinsic) parameters (dACE, hACE) [10]. ACE parameters define cycle lengths of 2dACE that contain at least hACE extrinsic paths, i.e., extrinsic variable nodes leading away from the cycle and are used in the procedure for the elimination of stopping sets for certain graph cycles based on the algorithm defined in [10] for errorfloor mitigation). The syndrome former is defined and filled with pre-defined connections. The primary objective of the pre-defined connections is to facilitate fast encoding [3], i.e., to ensure that the lower (c-b)×(c-b) part of H0T(t), t∈ {0, T-1} is the unit matrix. Therefore, fully rotated c×c unit matrices are inserted in the first c×c elements of each phase. Actual rotation depends on the rate and is given by:

Fig. 1. Examples of the predefined connections placed in the H0T(t), t∈ {0,
T-1}, sub-matrices of the syndrome former, to ensure fast encoding.

p

=

⎧c −1, ⎨⎩1− c,

b b

c < 0.5 c ≥ 0.5

(1)

where p>0 denotes right-wise column permutation and p<0

denotes left-wise column permutation. Fig. 1 shows various examples for H0T(0), for various rates when cxc unit matrices
are inserted. Other pre-defined connections can also be

inserted depending on the desired properties of the code. For

example, connections can be inserted at the last c×c columns

of each phase, in order to ensure that all phases have

connections as far possible in time as permitted by the

memory of the code. Then, an iterative procedure begins,

which places connections in the syndrome former until the

degree distributions are satisfied. For each phase φ the

corresponding column boundaries in the syndrome former are

found as

CS = {ϕ ⋅(c − b) +1,…,ϕ ⋅(c − b) + (ms +1)}

(2)

with (c-b)·(ms+1) elements. Until the variable node degree for this phase is fulfilled, random numbers, called locations, are

generated from a set of integers [c+1,…,(c-b)×(ms+1)-c], following a uniform distribution. Each location is translated

into a column index in the syndrome former by assigning the

location value, denoted as G, to the G-th index in CS and

selecting the corresponding element, denoted as g. A

randomly right-wise column permuted c×c unit matrix is

placed in the cell defined by columns [g,…,g+c-1] and the c

rows for this phase. The permutation value is randomly drawn

from a set of integer values [0,…,c-1], using a uniform

distribution, where 0 means no permutation at all. Selecting

locations from the aforementioned set, avoids the possibility

that g defines a cell within the pre-defined connections of H0T(t), t∈ {0, T-1}, and outside the physical boundaries of the syndrome former. For each randomly chosen location and

randomly rotated matrix, four checks are performed, and

failure in compliance with any of these, leads to the rejection

408
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:37:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

block diagram of the proposed method can be seen in Fig. 2. If for a given set of parameters a large number of fails occur, then ms is increased in order to lower the density of the matrix When the ACE criterion is used, a typical number of fails before a matrix is constructed can be as large as computationally afforded.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the random construction method. b: info-bits per encoding/decoding time instant; c: codeword bits per encoding/decoding time instant; ms: code memory; T: code period; t: phase counter; i: threshold counter; n: column range counter; NOT: number of times counter.
of the location and the generation of a new random location and permutation value.
These checks are: 1) The cell defined contains no previously placed connections at any of its columns/rows; 2) The connections do not cause check-node degree override. The equivalent check-node syndrome former is generated from the current configuration of the syndrome former, and the current check-node degree is found and compared to dc(1); 3) The connections do not cause cycles of length four. The cycles of length four are counted; 4) The connections do not cause an override of the ACE parameters. The presented method produces good codes even if ACE detection is omitted. If the random selection of a location and unit matrix for satisfying a specific degree value fails to pass the checks more than a predefined number of times (called the threshold), then the algorithm enters a different mode of operation, called the forced connections phase. In this mode it is suspected that the requirements placed on the parity-check matrix are very stringent, and a connection complying with all the check conditions may not exist. All possible locations and all possible permutation matrices are tried serially. The first connection to pass all criteria is accepted. If no connection is accepted at the end, then the algorithm fails. The detailed
(1) We note that dc is not specified for flexibility in placing connections but a maximum check-node degree per check node is defined.

III. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
The encoder complexity order is O(vs) [9], where vs=c(ms+1) is the constraint length of the code. The decoder complexity is shown in Table I where a total number of c×Ip×(ms+1) latching elements are needed for storing LLRs and decoding latency (denoted as the maximum time from the arrival of a symbol until it is decoded) is given by c-1· [(c − 1) + (ms+1)·c·I)]Ts, where Ip is the number of decoding processors, symbol rate=1/Ts and L is the termination bit length. It is assumed that c bits are loaded in the same time to the decoder memory [9]. An (N,K) LDPC of rate 1-K/N with average variable and check node degrees dv and dc, respectively (N is the number of columns and K is the number of rows in the H matrix) has been considered as reference for calculating the corresponding complexity of Table I. It should be noted that the upper bound in decoding latency is deduced by considering a serial architecture where the frame storage/loading procedure requires N clock cycles and the decoding procedure demands maximum 2N clock cycles. The encoding complexity of an LDPC-BC encoder for the WiMAX standard is on the order of O(N+z2) [11].

TABLE I MEMORY REQUIREMENTS AND HARDWARE RESOURCES FOR LDPC-CC

LDPC-CC Complexity Analysis Encoder Complexity Order Decoder

Procedure

Addition

Ip processors per bit
Ip processors per frame

(Ip-1)· dv2+ (b/c)·(dv+1) N·(Ip-1)·dv2+N· (b/c)·(dv+1)

Decoding Memory

Decoding Latency upper bound (UB)

LDPC-BC Complexity Analysis

Encoder Complexity Order

Decoder

Procedure

Addition

I dec.Iterations per bit
I dec.iterations per frame

(I-1) ·dv· dv +(1K/N)·(dv +1)
N· (I-1)· dv2+rate·N·( dv +1)

Decoding Memory

Decoding Latency upper bound (UB)

O(vs)

Comparison

AND (sign calc.)

[(c-b)·Ip·dc·(dc-

(c-b)

1)+b]/c

·Ip·dc·(dc-1)/c

N·[(c-b) ·Ip·dc· N· (c-b) ·Ip·dc·

(dc-1)+b]/c

(dc-1) /c

Ip·dv·vs c-1·[(c − 1) + (ms + 1) · c · Ip)]Ts

O(N+z2)

Comparison

AND (sign calc.)

(K/N)·I · dc·(dc -1)
+rate

(K/N)·I·dc·
(dc -1)

I·K·dc·(dc -1) + rate·N

I·K· dc · (dc -1)

N·( dv +1)

3·N·Ts

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND COMPARISONS
This Section is devoted to the comparison of the performance of LDPC-CC codes when used in frame based applications, with other coding schemes, and standardised LDPC-BCs. The construction method described in Section III has been used to derive two semi-regular LDPC-CC codes, code A and code B that have girth equal to 6, ms=127, T=63, code-rate=3/4, 252 variable nodes with degree = 3 and

409
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:37:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

average check degree=12 (code ensemble of ms ≅ 0.1N and T ≅ ms/2, where N is the frame size and rate=3/4). Code A was generated without enabling ACE detection while code B was constructed with the same properties including ACE detection checks with parameters (dACE=3, nACE=2). Both codes have been evaluated against the WiMAX (IEEE 802.16e) LDPC block code for frame size equal to 1152 bits and code-rate of ¾ using BPSK modulation scheme over AWGN channel with average check degree =14.16 and average variable degree =2.78. The LDPC-BC decoder performs 50 iterations and, on the other hand, the LDPC-CC decoder uses 50 processors. When ACE detection constraints are involved the error-floor is mitigated. For both codes A and B L=ms+1 bits are transmitted for termination purposes at the decoder’s side introducing an equivalent rate-loss of 128 bits. Fig. 3 shows the performance comparison in terms of bit-error-rate (BER) and frame-error-rate (FER) among LDPC-CC codes A and B and WiMAX LDPC-BC with frame-length=1152bits. Table II summarises the complexity evaluation among the aforementioned codes. It is noted that Code B exhibits slightly better performance in the convergence region than the WiMAX code while Code A presents a severe error-floor since no ACE constraints have been used to eliminate stopping sets for cycles equal to 6. Further improvements could be gained by proper selection of the degree distributions of Code B introducing higher irregularity in order to sustain the performance at Eb/N0 higher than 3.6dBs. The assessment of the encoding and decoding calculations shows that, for a rate loss of 128bits, the LDPC-encoder presents ten times lower encoding complexity. On the decoder’s side the LDPCCC decoder requires significantly less computation processing in contrast to the LDPC-BC schemes while it introduces larger latency and memory requirements. The proposed LDPC-CC exhibits less complexity and higher error-correcting capability at the convergence region while WiMAX LDPC-BC performs slightly better at the low-SNR region (due to its higher irregularity).
Fig. 3. Performance comparison among LDPC-CC codes A & B and WiMAX LDPC-BC.

TABLE II COMPLEXITY ASSESSMENT

Additions (per bit)
Comp. (per bit)
Sign calc. per bit Additions (per bit)
Comp. (per bit)
Sign calc. per bit Decoding Memory Decoding Latency UB Encoding Complexity
Rate-loss

WiMAX LDPC-BC
1074
2330 2329 1236776
2684241 2683377
4355
3456·Ts
O(3456) -

LDPC-CC Code A &B 444
1951 1238 22200
97538 61875 76800
6400·Ts
O(384) 128bits

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a construction method of LDPC-CCs based on permuted circulant unit matrices has been presented and a direct comparison of constructed LDPC-CC schemes for small frame sizes has been assessed in terms of complexity and error-correcting performance. To the best of our knowledge, it is reported in the literature for the first time and this is partially due to the fact that no construction method could efficiently address small frame sizes, since they require small ms values. It has been shown that with careful design and degree distribution selection LDPC-CCs can outperform LDPC-BCs with extra requirement for HW resources in terms of decoding memory while their encoding complexity is significantly lower. Future work could lead to the construction of tail-biting LDPC-CCs for rate-loss mitigation.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Jiménez-Feltström and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-45, pp. 2181-2191, Sept. 1999.
[2] S. Bates, Z. Chen, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity check convolutional codes for Ethernet networks,” In Proc. IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on Communications, Computers and Signal Processing, Victoria, B.C., Canada, Aug. 2005.
[3] A. E. Pusane, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Construction of irregular LDPC convolutional codes with fast decoding”, In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications, Istanbul, Turkey, June 2006.
[4] A. Sridharan, “Design and analysis of LDPC convolutional codes,” Ph. D. dissertation, Un. of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, 2005, 2005.
[5] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, “On deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from QC LDPC block codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, July 2007.
[6] S. Kudekar, T.J. Richardson, R.L. Urbanke, “Threshold Saturation via Spatial Coupling: Why Convolutional LDPC Ensembles Perform So Well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.57, no.2, pp.803834, Feb. 2011.
[7] Y. Murakami, S. Okasaka, S. Okamura, T. Kishigami, and M. Orihashi, “LDPC convolutional codes based on parity check polynomial,” In Proc. Int. Symp. on Wireless Personal Multimedia Commun. (WPMC), Finland, Sept. 2008.
[8] F. Gioulekas, C. Petrou, M. Birbas, “Time-varying low-density paritycheck convolutional codes,” U.S. Patent 0 061117 A1, Mar. 7, 2013
[9] D. J. Costello, Jr., A. E. Pusane, S. Bates, and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes”, In Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory and Applications Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, February 6-10, 2006.
[10] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Comm, vol. 52, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[11] T. J. Richardson and R. L Urbanke. Efficient Encoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes, IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb. 2001.

410
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:37:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

