Configurable and High-Throughput Architectures for Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Alaa Aldin A L HARIRI, Fabrice MONTEIRO, Loie SIÉLER, Abbas DANDACHE Université de Lorraine, 7 rue Marconi, 57070 Metz, France
{alaa-aldin.al-hariri, fabriccmonteiro, loic.sieler, abbas.dandache}@univ-lorraine.fr

Abstract—LDPC codes are currently the most promising cod­ the parallelism levels). The details of the proposed architec­

ing technique to achieve the Shannon capacity, making them tures are discussed in the next sections. very popular in modern telecommuncation applications. Despite

the attractivity stemming from their effectiveness, encoding and decoding LDPC codes is a rather complex task, due to the size and structure of the codes, especially when considering the

II. SYSTEMATIC LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES
A (n, k) LDPC code is a linear block code that can be

ever increasing need for higher throughput in communication represented by its Parity Check Matrix (PCM) H,anx{n — k)

networks. All these constraints are setting the demand for new matrix, codewords v being defined through equation 1. encoding/decoding architectures very high.

In this paper, we propose effective encoder and decoder architectures for the Quasi-Cycle subclass of LDPC codes. The main features being targeted are pre-synthesis configurability and high throughput. QC-LDPC codes exhibit a highly regular structure in their parity check matrices making easier the design process to obtain the high levels of architectural parallelism necessary to achieve the required high throughputs.

H • vT = 0(mod2)

(1)

A codeword v of length n has k information bits and n — k parity bits. The corresponding code rate is r = k/n. LDPC codes are usually represented by a bi-partite graph in which a variable node corresponds to a codeword bit (and a PCM

In order to validate our design, several encoder and decoder were implemented on FPGAs of the Altera Stratix III and Xilinx Virtex4 using different code parameters (block length and code rate) for QC-LPDC codes from the WiMAX (IEEE 802.16e) and the WiFi (IEEE 802.1 In) protocols. Throughputs up to 32 Gbits/s and 732 Mbits/s have been achieved for the encoder and decoder, respectively.
Index Terms—Error correcting codes, QC-LDPC, parallel and configurable architectures, FPGA implementation, min-sum(MS) algorithm.

column) and a check node corresponds to a parity check equation (and a PCM row) [7]. An edge exists between a pair of nodes (variable node and check node) when there is a "1" in the corresponding PCM entry.
The i7-matrix consists in two parts, Hd and Hp, whose respective dimensions are {n — k) x k and {n — k) x {n — k) [8], [9]. The corresponding systematic codeword v = [dp] is the concatenation of the information bits [d] and the parity bits [k]. The QC-LDPC codes addressed in this paper are generated

I. INTRODUCTION The increasing requirement for high data rates and reli­

using semi-random techniques, with a simple dual-diagonal structure for Hp and Hd consisting in arrays of sub-matrices A, as indicated in equation 2.

ability in modern communication systems is pushing next-

Hd

Hp

generation standards towards new effective error correction schemes able to allow high throughput decoding with near

10

0]

11

0

Shannon limit performance. In this context, LDPC codes are currently the most promising coding technique, able to achieve

0

0

11

up to 0.04dB of the Shannon's limit [1]. LDPC codes can be The sub-matrices Aij that build-up Hd are square circulate found in a large variety of recent communications standards matrices in which each row is the cyclic shift of the row above

such as 10GBASE-T, WiFi (IEEE 802.1 In), WiMAX (IEEE 802.16) [2] and video broadcasting standards such as DVB-S2 and DVB-T2). Several architectures have been proposed for LDPC encoders [3], [4] and decoders [5], [6]. But, in most

it. The Hp and Hd matrices having both regular structures
make unnecessary to store them in memory as they can be easily generated using Aitj = Al^(. The parity bits p = {pi}
and information bits d = {d^}, which are calculated using

cases, only a single family or even a single type of LDPC equations 3 and 4, can be easily implemented using exclusive-

codes is addressed, often for only a single fixed block length OR gates and flip-flops [8].

and/or code rate.

In this paper, we are proposing alternative architectures for

both the encoder and the decoder, compatible with a wide range of standardized QC-LDPC in different block lengths and code rates. The architectures are fully configurable at the pre-

3

Pi=Pi-± + Y.hiidJ

w

synthesis stage (with concern to both the code parameters and

3

978-l-4799-4242-8/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

790

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. ENCODER ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we describe the proposed flexible encoder ar­ chitecture. The flexible parameters of the encoder architecture are: the size of sub-matrices Aij, the code rate and the block size of the LDPC code. As shown in fig. 1, the architecture is made of four main parts: the calculation window (encoder core), the control-unit, the counter and the memory.

connected to check node (CN) Ci, excluding the j3 information from Vj.
The error rate performance of the Min-Sum algorithm can be improved employing check node update that uses scaling factor S-factor as indicated in equation 5. The normalization factors can be obtained by simulation, typically 0<S-factor<l

aij = TT sign(/3ij,)x

min (|/%/ |) x S (5)

., , ., , ., . .

j',hij' = l,j'zj

Column processing or variable node update: these mes­ sages, as given by equations 6 and 7, are computed from the sum of the extrinsic messages sent by the other check nodes connected to variable node Vj, excepting check node Ci and channel information (Aj).

j',hij = l

Pij = Zj - atj

(7)

Syndrome check and early termination: when column pro­ cessing is finished, every bit in column j is updated by adding the channel information (\j) and a messages from connected check nodes. From the updated vector, an estimated code vector Vr=[t/i,..., Vn] is calculated as follows:

Fig. 1. Basic structure of a standard LDPC encoder

\ 0 if Zj > 0

The Encoder Core or calculation window is a parallel processing unit in which the partial calculations for the parity bits are computed according to equations 3 and 4. This window processes many sub-matrices in parallel. The window is used

Then, this vector is evaluated: if equation (8) is correct, that means V is a valid code word and therefore the iterative process has converged and decoding stops.

to calculate V ■ hf ,-rf7- and it consists of blocks of XORs and

H.vT = 0(mod2)

(8)

shift registers. The information before encoding (input frame) is stored in z Simple Dual-Port RAM with different read and

Otherwise the decoding continues into another iteration.

write addresses.

A. PROPOSED DECODER ARCHITECTURE

The controller is the management unit of the overall archi­ tecture. It can be configured at synthesis to allows to support the desired code parameters and related encoding rate and matrices sizes. If controls the read/write operations and the width of the calculation window by the control of the shift register operations, from 1-bit shift to multiple-bit shift.

Here, we are proposing a configurable and flexible LDPC decoder architecture, the flexible parameters being: T the size of the sub-matrix A, R the code rate, and the block size that must be scalable to fit different LDPC code block sizes. The decoder architecture is made of four main parts: two calculation windows, memories and a controller, as shown

IV. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM

in Fig 2. The first calculation window is dedicated to check node processing. The length of the window is equal to s

Several algorithms have been proposed for LDPC decoding, (number of parallel processed row sub-matrices) and the width

most of them deriving from the well-known belief propagation is w (number of colomn sub-matrices). The number of Comps

(BP) algorithm [1]. LDPC codes are usually decoded with an iterative message passing algorithm, consisting in two sequential operations: row processing (or check node update) and column processing (or variable node update).
The MinSum Algorithm (MS) is one of the most common iterative message-passing decoding algorithms (TPMP) being used. For each i and j , where i is the number of column

functions in each window is equal to (T x w), every Comp having s inputs, thanks to this window processing, (s x w) sub-matrices are handled on each clock cycle. It works the comparison between s absolute value of variable to check node message /3 and the temporary results of last window. Comp function are represented in fig . 3 (a). We also need to calculate /3ij by subtracting a^ form Zj as indicated in equation 7.

processing output, and j the number of row processing output, The second calculation window is variable node processing

two messages are passed to calculate the check node update as shown in fig. 3 (b). It has the same size as first window

Uij and the variable node update pV,-.

(s x w) but instead of using Comps functions, it uses SUM

Row processing or check node update: compute a^ mes­ functions to cumulate the check to variable node messages a

sages using /3 messages from all other variable nodes (VN) with information from an AWGN (Additive White Gaussian

791
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

variable node update calculation window

Fig. 2. Schematics of the proposed decoder architecture

Noise) channel A as shown in equation 6. In each calculation window, there are long shift-registers used to store the results of each window and rearranged in order to be re-used in the next cycle.
There are four single port RAM memories. The first is channel information memory. The second is the Check node Sum-memory which is used to retain the final sum messages generated by adding the channel information (\j) and a messages from the connected check nodes. The third memory is the minimum message memory that stores the overall minimum /3 messages (mini), the second overall minimum (min2), the index of the connected variable node providing mini (index) and the overall sign (sgn) for every check node Ci messages correspondingly. The last memory is to store the sign of CN to VN updated messages.
The last part is Control-unit. It is composed of a finite state machine, this unit being synchronized and controling the other units of the architecture. Configuration provide support for different deconding rates, size of sub-matrices Aij, size of calculation windows. It drives the read and write address for all these memories, controls the shift registers and and the Syndrome check for early termination of the iterative decoding algorithm.
V. ANALYSIS OF IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
In order to evaluate the proposed encoder/decoder architec­ ture, several VHDL configurations were synthesized on FPGA. First, two encoders for WiMAX (IEEE 802.16e) with block length of 1152 bits and 2304 bits and a code rate of 1/2 synthesized on StratixIII device (EP3SE50F780C2). Then, two decoders with the same block length and code rate. For more evaluation and comparison with other decoder architectures, we synthesized our decoder on Xilinx Virtex-4 for IEEE

M a c i L o q i c P, P*

I

Mm 1

Ps Min2

\P*\ J,Z^L, ^—^-FZL

Mini

-:^I_\4=ZTLHC.„

I

»- MIN2

—*■ In&exMin

1

1/S.Ì ^—^.fEEr^

M,n2

C o m p —1 ,

~T

L = log2(s)

i Sign Logic

. Sign

. - * —^

->£Qii

^=0-1

(a) Check Node Processing Unit

A,

-+

2's to

Ml

SM

P»

a,

SMto2'5

I,

z,-£_«»+*

A,= ' ZJ

+

CU SMto 2'5

+

2's to

P5

SM

(b) Variable Node Processing Unit

Fig. 3. (a) Check Node Processing Unit, (b) Variable Node Processing Unit

802.1 lac (WiFi) code with block length of 1944 bits and a code rate of 1/2. The results obtained from synthesis and im­ plementation concerning the decoder's hardware requirements and performance are summarized in Table I.
The configuration used for the decoder architecture in [6] is close to the one used for our decoder, decoding Algorithm (Min-Sum) being the same, frame size of 2304 bits, code rate 1/2, implementation being on a Altera Stratix FPGA. Comparing the throughputs, our decoder is two times faster, but it requires more logic elements with a almost similar number of register bits. The design is efficient compared to the consumption of Memory as shown in the Table I. Decoder [5] is a IEEE 802.1 In (WiFi) decoder with frame size of 1944 bits and implementation on Xilinx technology. For fair comparison, our decoder architecture was also implemented (from the same

792
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I COMPARISON OF FPGA SYNTHESIS RESULTS FOR LDPC ENCODER/DECODER ARCHITECTURE

Block Length (bits) Registers
Area(Slices /ALUTs) 4-input LUTs Memory bits FPGA
Throughput (Mbps)

Proposed encoder

decoder [5]

2304

1152 1 1944

906

473

1604

818

394

5908

NA

NA

10816

4608 Stratix-III

2304

56376

Virtex-II

32832

| 18528

32

decoder [6]
2304 6598 17,259 NA 271104 Stratix-II 232.5

Proposed decoder

1944

1152

2304

6106 21494 39797

3546 14955 NA

7051 30571

36936

21888 | 43776

Virtex-IV Stratix-III

291

235 | 449.7

— ► — fixed-point NMS LDPCI672.336. — 9 — fixed-point NMS LDPCi
*— fixed-point NMS LDPC(1152 5761 - ♦ - floating point SPA LDPC(1152,576)
fixed-point NMS LDPCI
Fig. 4. Bit error rate(BER) results for LDPC WiMAX decoder for different frame sizes

architecture is flexible and compatible with a wide range of standardized QC-LDPC and different block lengths. To validate our design, several QC-LDPC encoders and decoders were implemented for different code parameters (block length and code rate) on two different FPGA families. Encoder design provide support for very high data rates (up to 32.8 GB/s) with still acceptable hardware consumption. Data rates up to 732 Mbps were achieved on the LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.1 In (WiFi) with a code rate of 5/6. The proposed design is easily scalable by increasing the parallelism. The proposed design has an efficient memory consumption thanks to the calculation method for variable node update and check node update messages, leading to 2 to 11 times less memory requirements compared to prior designs. With a maximum of 20 decoding iterations. The error performance loss of the MinSum normalized with input from channel and extrinsic quantization of (5,7) bits respectively, is reduced to 0.2 dB compared to floating point.

code) on the same FPGA family, as indicated in the Table I. Our architecture usex 3 to 4 times HW but in contrast, it supports a throughput about nine times higher with lower requirement on memory bits. To achieve an optimized area for our LDPC decoder while preserving the communication system performances in terms of bit error rates (BER) with acceptable performance degradation in terms of bit error rates, quantization levels of input from channel and extrinsic are (5,7) bits respectively and scaling factors of 0.875 were used. The BER achieved is close to the floating point simulation results with acceptable BER degradation of less than 0.2 dB as shown in Fig 4. The throughput of the proposed decoder is easily scalable by increasing the parallelism factor or changing the code rate. For instance, the first WiMAX LDPC decoder is able to achieve 73 Mbps with a code rate of 5/6 at a maximum operating frequency of 122 MHz (as obtained after synthesis, placement and routing). Effectiveness concerning the memory consumption requirements of the decoder design results from the method employed to calculatie the variable node update and check node update messages, that avoids storing all the messages in the memory except the result of COMP function (minl,min2,index,sing) for each row and the overall summations for every column.
VI. CONCLUSION

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallagher, "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes", M.I.T. Press, Cam­ bridge, MA, 1963.
[2] IEEE Standard, section 20.3.11.6 "802.11n-2009", IEEE October 29, 2009, accessed March 21, 2011.
[3] D.U. Lee, W. Luk, C. Wang, C. Jones "A Flexible Hardware Encoder for Low Density Parity Check Codes", IEEE Symposium on FieldProgrammable Custom Computing Machines, pp. 101-111, Napa Val­ ley, California, April 2004.
[4] H. Yasotharan, A.C. Carusone, "A Flexible Hardware Encoder for Systematic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes", IEEE International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 54-57, Cancun, Mexico, August 2009.
[5] V.A. Chandrasetty, S.M. Aziz, "A Highly Flexible LDPC Decoder using Hierarchical Quasi-Cyclic Matrix with Layered Permutation", Journal of Networks, vol. 7, no. 3, March 2012.
[6] H. Ding, S. Yang, W Luo, M. Dong, "Design and Implementation for High Speed LDPC Decoder with Layered Decoding", WRI Interna­ tional Conference on Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 1, pp. 156-160, Kunming, Yunnan ,China, January 2009.
[7] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, J.R. Cavallaro, "High Throughput, Parallel, Scalable LDPC Encoder/Decoder Architecture for OFDM systems", IEEE Dallas CAS Workshop on Design, Applications, Integration and Software, pp. 225-228, Dallas, Texas, October 2006.
[8] L. Ping, WK. Leung, N. Phamdo, "Low Density Parity Check Codes with Semi-Random Parity Check Matrix", Electronics Letters, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 38-39, January 1999.
[9] X. Jiang, Y. Yan, M.H. Lee, "Semi-Random and Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes based on Multiple Parity-Check Codes", IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 1-5, Cape Town, South-Africa, May 2010.

A new architecture was presented for a configurable QCLDPC encoder/decoder using a semi-random H-matrix. This

793
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

