412

IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 4, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2014

Memristive Circuits for LDPC Decoding
Jussi H. Poikonen, Eero Lehtonen, Mika Laiho, Member, IEEE, and Jonne K. Poikonen, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We present design principles for implementing decoders for low-density parity check codes in CMOL-type memristive circuits. The programmable nonvolatile connectivity enabled by the nanowire arrays in such circuits is used to map the parity check matrix of an LDPC code in the decoder, while decoding operations are realized by a cellular CMOS circuit structure. We perform detailed performance analysis and circuit simulations of example decoders, and estimate how CMOL and memristor characteristics such as the memristor OFF/ON resistance ratio, nanowire resistance, and the total capacitance of the nanowire array affect decoder specification and performance. We also analyze how variation in circuit characteristics and persistent device defects affect the decoders.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, memristors, parity check codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N THIS work, we consider the use of an emerging technology—CMOL-type memristive circuits—in decoding error correcting LDPC codes. This is a computational task of practical significance especially in digital communication and data storage systems. We begin by briefly outlining the considered technologies and their currently perceived significance, the motivation for the considered area of computing, and the specific objectives of this work.
A memristor—short for memory resistor—is a two-terminal resistive component, whose resistance changes as a function of the voltage across or the current through it. Theoretical concepts regarding memristors, which were postulated by Leon Chua in 1971 [1], can be used to explain the dynamical properties of various emerging memory devices based on resistive switching, such as resistive RAM and phase-change memories [2]; in this work we assume the term memristor refers to all such devices. Various different physical realizations of memristors have been reported, for example in [3]–[6]. A natural circuit topology for the use of memristors is a nanowire crossbar structure, where
Manuscript received March 28, 2014; revised July 15, 2014; accepted September 17, 2014. Date of publication October 13, 2014; date of current version December 09, 2014. This work was supported by the Academy of Finland under Grant 253596, Grant 258831, Grant 264914, and Grant 140108. This paper was recommended by Guest Editor S. Bhunia.
J. H. Poikonen is with the Department of Communications and Networking (Comnet), Aalto University, 20740 Turku, Espoo, Finland (e-mail: jussi.poikonen@utu.fi).
E. Lehtonen, M. Laiho, and J. K. Poikonen are with the Technology Research Center (TRC), University of Turku, Turku, Finland (e-mail: elleht@utu.fi; mika. laiho@utu.fi; jokapo@utu.fi).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JETCAS.2014.2361071

a memristive device is located at each crossing of two wires. This topology allows the realization of extremely dense nonvolatile random-access memories, as each memory cell consists of a single memristor, whose feature size can already be scaled down to a few tens of nanometers [3]. Memristive memory technology has been reported to be approaching commercial viability as a replacement for Flash and DRAM memories [7], [8].
The CMOL (CMOS/molecular hybrid) [9] architecture facilitates the realization of a programmable communication network on top of CMOS integrated circuits by interfacing active CMOS components with passive memristive crossbars. Besides memory circuits, existing proposals for practical applications of CMOL circuits have focused especially on implementations of neuromorphic systems consisting of memdevicebased synapses and CMOS-based artificial neurons [10]–[12]. Memristive devices and systems can also be used to implement Boolean logic directly within memory arrays, as considered recently for example in [13]–[16]. CMOL-type realization of parallelized memristor logic is considered in [17].
In this work we utilize a specific benefit of the CMOL architecture: it allows programmable, nonvolatile, and area efficient connectivity between CMOS processing elements. A general drawback in the CMOL architecture is that addressing several memristors simultaneously in the associated nanowire crossbar is limited. However, we show that in the presented LDPC decoding approach this is not a significant limitation, as the considered decoding circuits consist of independent parallel processing cells, and require mainly global signaling.
LDPC decoding is one of the key enablers of near-capacity information transfer in modern digital communication systems and memory circuits. Practical application of these codes is facilitated by iterative decoding, which in essence allows a shift from a complex global decoding problem to operating a large number of relatively simple parallel processing elements with complex interconnections. In general, added interconnection complexity in LDPC coding improves code performance, but presents significant implementation challenges in energy-efficient decoder hardware realizations. In this work we demonstrate how the CMOL architecture can be used to implement reconfigurable iterative decoding with simple CMOS designs, yielding low power and energy consumption using a 130 nm CMOS technology.
Compared to conventional purely CMOS-based LDPC decoders, the considered designs benefit from removal of the physical routing between parallel processing elements, and related routing memory and programming, from the CMOS layer. Another benefit of this approach is that performing signal processing related to error correction coding directly within, for example, CMOL-type resistive memory circuits should be more

2156-3357 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

POIKONEN et al.: MEMRISTIVE CIRCUITS FOR LDPC DECODING

413

efficient in terms of design, circuit area, and energy efficiency in later studies to implement decoders of varying complexity.

than passing all stored data to corresponding external processing To estimate the baseline performance of the considered design

circuits.

approach, we analyze and implement simple bit flipping iter-

It should be noted that CMOL circuits are not yet a mature ative LDPC decoders with practical significance for example

technology, which means that comprehensive measurements on in ultra low power applications such as bio-compatible elec-

their characteristics and performance are not currently available. tronics [18] and energy-efficient wireless communication sys-

In the following we apply published empirical data on memris- tems [19], [20]. Furthermore, such decoders are used for ex-

tive device characteristics when available, and consider analyt- ample in fibre-optic systems, where the communication channel

ically the effects of currently not well known circuit character- can be approximated to be binary symmetric, and hard decision

istics. Specifically, we assume memristor characteristics from demodulation is assumed by default [21].

empirical results published in [6], where also integration of a

nanowire array on top of a CMOS circuit was demonstrated. The computing approach considered in this work is not restricted

II. BACKGROUND AND ASSUMED DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS

to this single memristor technology, however; in principle, any resistive switching devices whose characteristics match the re-

A. Principles of Memristive Devices

quirements outlined in the following could be applied.

A memristor is in this work defined as a nonvolatile pro-

grammable resistor whose resistance can be changed by ap-

A. Main Objectives

plying a voltage across, or current through, the device. The number of reliably programmable resistance states of a mem-

A significant property of the CMOL architecture considered ristor depends on its fabrication, and the resulting dynamic de-

in this work is that it can be used to realize circuits which en- vice characteristics. For example, bistable devices called binary

able computations directly within memory structures. Exam- memristors have been reported in [4], [22], while an analog

ples of such circuits were recently considered for example in memristor with a seemingly continuous range of memristances

[12], where various CMOL-based memristive associative mem- is presented in [23].

ories utilizing 1–2 nanowire layers for memory and computing In this work, we utilize binary memristors. The physical char-

purposes were presented. The primary objective of this work acteristics of the devices utilized in this work are based on those

is to show how a single additional nanowire layer and rela- demonstrated empirically in [6]. For the decoding algorithms

tively simple additional logic in the CMOS cells can be used considered in the rest of this paper, it is not necessary to change

to add basic LDPC decoding functionality to a CMOL-type the resistance states of memristors after initially programming

memory/computing circuit. For example, the CMOS cells in the them according to a specific LDPC code. Note, however, that the

associative memory circuits presented in [12] already contain considered architecture allows for configuring the decoder ac-

the components required for the current sum-based decoder pre- cording to any LDPC code within the dimensions of the circuit.

sented in the following; in the CMOS layer its implementation We define the memristor as a voltage controlled two-terminal

thus requires mainly different control signal configurations and bistable linear device having the on-resistance and the off-

some additional switching logic. It is worth noting that the math- resistance

, where

is assumed to be much larger

ematical operations performed by the decoder considered in the than . Correspondingly we say that a memristor is either in

following can also be used for LDPC encoding.

a conducting (ON) or a nonconducting (OFF) state. A memristor

Secondary objectives of this work are as follows.

is programmed to ON-state by applying a voltage larger than

• Where empirical data on CMOL circuit characteristics is a threshold voltage across it; correspondingly applying a

not available, to approximate the numerical circuit and de- voltage more negative than

programs the memristor to

vice parameter values required in practice to yield useful OFF-state.

results. Specifically, in Sections II and III we consider how In Section III-B we also consider the use of rectifying mem-

technology characteristics such as nanowire and memristor ristors, that is, memristors which pass significant current only

capacitance and OFF-ON resistance ratio limit the per- in one direction. Such devices have been reported empirically

formance of the considered decoders. In Section V we for example in [5] and [6]. These are programmed to OFF-

analyze how inaccurate memristor programming, varying state identically to nonrectifying devices by applying a voltage

nanowire resistance, limited processing accuracy, and de- smaller than

across them. Memristor programming is a

vice defects affect decoding performance.

fundamental operation in CMOL circuits, and is not discussed

• To estimate the benefits and drawbacks of the CMOL ar- in detail in this paper. However, we do analyze the effect of in-

chitecture compared to traditional CMOS approaches in accurate programming, or variation in the resistance states

implementing decoding algorithms. In order to do this, we and

on decoding performance in Section V.

present in Section IV performance estimates and HSPICE We assume nonvolatile memristors, which need to be pro-

simulations of the considered decoding circuits.

grammed only once per LDPC code to be decoded. Thus this

On the other hand, the focus of this work is not to produce programming can be performed using accurate but relatively

a comprehensive study on CMOS cell designs required for dif- time-consuming methods such as cyclic programming, as dis-

ferent types of iterative decoding algorithms. Rather, we outline cussed in [24], or the variation-tolerant algorithm presented in

a basic design principle which can be used to add error correc- [25]. In the latter, the authors demonstrate memristor program-

tion functionality to CMOL circuits, and which may be used ming with less than 1% deviation from the target conductances.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

414

IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 4, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2014

that the nanowire array is slanted with respect to the CMOS cell array to allow vertical and horizontal nanowires—or memristors—to be controlled by CMOS cells. A limitation of this architecture is that it is not possible to address an arbitrary set of memristors; for example, to program two memristors simultaneously, it is necessary to drive two horizontal and two vertical nanowires, and there are four memristors located at the crossings of these wires. However, the decoding circuits described in this article require mainly global control signals, and it is not necessary to address individual memristors during the decoding, which means that the considered decoding algorithms are well suited for the CMOL architecture.

Fig. 1. Conceptual structure of a CMOL circuit with multiple vertically stacked nanowire layers. Note that in the left inset, vias are depicted only between the CMOS cells and the first nanowire layer; in practice, separate vias are realized for each layer. CMOS cells may use the different nanowire layers for various purposes, for example for storing data. In this work, we show how a single nanowire layer can be used to implement LDPC decoding. Designs for the CMOS cells denoted here by are presented in Figs. 5 and 9.

C. Device Parameters
1) Memristors: We assume memristor characteristics corresponding to the devices presented empirically in [6]. Specifically, we consider the use of rectifying memristors located at the crossings of perpendicular nanowires of width 50

nm, separated vertically by a 20 nm memristive switching layer

of amorphous silicon. The reported ratio of memristor ON- and

Note that nonvolatile binary memristors have been demon- OFF-resistances is of the order of with ON-resistances of

strated for example in [4], where the reported devices retain order

and OFF-resistances of order

. In this work

their resistance state more than 10 years at

.

we assume nominal resistance values

and

Memristors are naturally fabricated within a nanowire

; the effect of variation in these values caused

crossbar where a memristor is placed at each crossing of two by inaccurate programming or device variation is analyzed in

nanowires [26]. The nanowires are driven by CMOS circuitry Section V. As will be shown in Section III, the ratio of the

which is proposed to be located physically below the nanowire memristors’ OFF- and ON-resistances limits the maximum

crossbar [9]. This CMOS/molecular hybrid (CMOL) architec- LDPC code block size decodable in parallel using a single

ture makes memristive nanowire crossbars ideally suited for nanowire crossbar. Therefore, it is desirable to have as large an

facilitating programmable communication and memory within OFF-ON resistance ratio as possible.

a CMOS chip.

2) Nanowire Capacitance: Currently, there is little empir-

ical data available on memristor capacitances. We estimate the

B. CMOL Circuits

parasitic capacitance of a single memristor as a parallel plate

capacitance

An example of a CMOL-type CMOS/memristor hybrid ar-

chitecture [9], [27] is illustrated in Fig. 1. It consists of a CMOS

(1)

layer stacked vertically with a number of nanowire layers, or

memristive crossbars. For simplicity, we consider in this work only one nanowire layer connected to the CMOS cells. The CMOS layer is used for signal restoration, gain and processing, and it is interfaced with the memristive crossbar—which acts as a memory layer and as a programmable communication network for the chip—by vertical vias. The CMOS layer is divided into cells whose design depends on the functionality of the system.

where

is the vacuum permittivity,

is the relative permittivity of amorphous silicon,

is the area of the memristor, and

is the

vertical plate distance, or dielectric thickness.

Furthermore, we approximate the capacitance between two

parallel nanowires as

For example, if a CMOL architecture is used as a random access

memory, the CMOS cells comprise merely of pass-transistors,

(2)

which are used to select two mutually perpendicular nanowires

and thus the memristor located between them. CMOS cell de- where is the length of a nanowire, and it is assumed that a

signs facilitating LDPC decoding in the CMOL architecture are nanowire’s thickness

is the same as its width. The

demonstrated in Section III, and illustrated in Figs. 5 and 9.

distance between parallel nanowires is , and we assume that

As illustrated in Fig. 1, each CMOS cell can drive one hori- the nanowires are separated by a silicon dioxide substrate with

zontal and one vertical nanowire, and thus two CMOS cells are relative permittivity

. Note that the distance de-

required to address a single memristor located at the crossing of pends on the area of the CMOS cells in the CMOL structure;

a horizontal and a vertical nanowire. To simultaneously control as presented in Section IV-A, our estimate for the sizes of the

only these two CMOS cells, four CMOS wires are needed—thus example cells implemented with 130 nm technology is approx-

the CMOL architecture generally requires double addressing imately

. We can thus approximate the distance

compared for example to an array of CMOS cells. Note also between parallel nanowires as

, where is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

POIKONEN et al.: MEMRISTIVE CIRCUITS FOR LDPC DECODING

415

D. LDPC Codes and Decoding

A Low-Density Parity Check code is described completely by

its parity check matrix . The columns of represent the bits

—often called variables—in an LDPC codeword, while the

rows of specify a number of parity checks:

when

bit is included in the th parity check, and each check consists

of an XOR operation over the included bits. We denote the row

weight, or number of input bits participating in the th parity

check by , or simply , when all row weights are assumed

to be equal. Correspondingly, the column weight, or number

checks corresponding to bit , is denoted by or . The LDPC

code construction problem is to find good parity check matrices

in terms of theoretical error correction capability and coding/

decoding performance. Detailed information on LDPC codes

Fig. 2. Estimated nanowire capacitance as a function of the LDPC codeword can be found for example in [28].

length .

By definition, the parity check matrices of LDPC codes have

low density—all rows and columns are sparse, which allows

for efficient decoding. In accordance with Shannon’s random

the number of memristors along a nanowire. We estimate the total capacitance of a nanowire as

coding principle, good LDPC codes can be generated by selecting pseudorandomly according to some constraints on the row and column densities. However, encoding randomly gener-

ated codes is complex, and analysis of the properties and theo-

(3)

retical performance of such codes is difficult. It is thus beneficial to have random-like LDPC codes which can be constructed

taking into account parallel plate capacitances and capaci-

tances to two neighboring parallel wires. Fig. 2 illustrates the

magnitudes of the estimated capacitances as functions of ,

when we assume that the nanowire length

. This

total capacitance estimate is used in Section IV-B to approx-

imate the decoding speed and corresponding decoder energy

consumption.

3) Nanowire Resistance: The decoding methods presented in

Section III are essentially based on measuring simultaneously

the resistances of several memristors on a nanowire. The re-

sistances of the nanowires affect these measurements, as the

total resistance depends on the length of the associated current

path, and will vary over the decoder circuit. We estimate the

maximum resistance from nanowires—corresponding to a cur-

rent path between diagonally opposite corners of the nanowire

array—as

algebraically, and contain a regular structure such as check matrix rows which are cyclic shifts of each other. Especially quasicyclic (QCLDPC) codes [29], where consists of a number of circulant submatrices, are currently widely used, as they are relatively simple to construct and implement, and provide good error correction performance. These are also well suited for the decoders considered in this work, as will be shown.
Bit flipping algorithms are the simplest approach to iterative decoding of LDPC codes. As an example of bit flipping, consider an LDPC codeword where one bit is erroneous. Suppose that in the parity check matrix of the considered code, the weight, or number of ones, of the th column is . The single error will then cause parity checks to fail. In a well-designed LDPC code, no other bit is involved in all the same parity checks as , meaning that the number of unsatisfied checks per bit will be larger for bit than for any other bit. A bit flipping decoder may look for the largest number of unsatisfied parity

checks, and in this case flip bit , producing the correct code-

(4) word. Allowing for the possibility of several erroneous bits in a

codeword, this same procedure can be implemented in an itera-

where

is again the length of a single nanowire and silver

nanowires with resistivity

are assumed,

as well as a rectangular nanowire cross-section with area

. If we assume that the maximum nanowire length is

tive fashion, if the code is well designed.

Let be the undecoded input vector. For

, the math-

ematical operations performed by the decoders described in the

following are

of the order of 1 mm, this maximum resistance will be of the

order of

, which is 2% of the assumed memristor ON-re-

(5)

sistance. For the considered decoding approaches, it is not the maximum nanowire resistance, but the deviation from mean re-

(6)

sistance which may cause decoding errors. This deviation is al-

ways smaller than

, which corresponds in this case where

is a row vector containing the parity check results

to less than 1% of the memristor ON-resistance. Worst-case ef- for all rows of , and

is a vector whose th element is

fects of nanowire resistance variation are considered in more 1 if the th element of is greater than or equal to and 0

detail in Section V.

otherwise.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

416

IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 4, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 3. Bit error rates versus signal-to-noise ratio corresponding to uncoded bi-

nary phase shift keying (BPSK), the random coding bound [32] for the binary

symmetric channel (BSC), and a randomly generated LDPC code [28] of code-

word length 500 bits with

, decoded with bit flipping (BF) and

min-sum (MS) algorithms.

In the following, we outline two approaches to decoding

LDPC codes in a CMOL circuit structure. In the first, com-

putations are based on measuring current sums in the CMOS

cells, and in the second, computations are performed using

digital logic. To be efficient, the digital approach requires the

decoded LDPC code to have certain characteristics specified in

Section III-B; QC-LDPC codes are particularly well suited for

this decoder.

In both of these decoding approaches, the

parity

check matrix of the LDPC code is represented by the states

of memristors at the crossings of horizontal and vertical

nanowires, that is, memristor is in a low resistance (ON)

state if

, and in a high resistance (OFF) state oth-

erwise. We assume in the following that the CMOL circuit has

been initialized in this way according to a given parity check

matrix, and do not explicitly consider the circuitry required for

programming the memristors. The states of the memristors do

not change during the following decoding procedures.

The threshold can be selected for example to flip a fixed fraction of the bits corresponding to the largest numbers of unsatisfied checks. Also, it is possible to weigh the bits in the codeword according to external reliability information, and use this to find the most probable erroneous bits at each iteration [30], [31]. Such decoding approaches the principle of belief propagation, where the decoder operates with continuous-valued estimates of the likelihoods of bit values instead of quantized bits. This requires more information on the transmission channel than bit flipping, and updating the likelihood values at each iteration is relatively complicated. However, belief-propagation produces near-optimal decoding.
In terms of bit error rate (BER) versus signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the performance of an LDPC code is crucially dependent on the size and structure of the parity check matrix, and on the algorithm used for decoding. An example of this is presented in Fig. 3, where the bit error rate of an LDPC code of length 500 bits is shown for bit flipping (BF) and min-sum (MS) decoding. For comparison, the random coding bound [32] is shown; this represents the optimal BER performance of a code with this length when the related communication channel is binary symmetric, that is, no soft channel information is available. The asymptotic distance between the BF decoding performance and the random coding bound demonstrates that the structure of the simulated code is not optimal. On the other hand, the distance between the random coding bound and the MS decoding performance shows that if soft channel information is available, its use in more complicated decoding algorithms provides improvement in BER performance. A related tradeoff is that near-optimal decoders typically consume significantly more power and energy per decoded bit than for example bit flipping decoders. Therefore the choice of decoder type generally depends on the application-specific energy budget and power limitations. Please note that the discussion above applies directly to the performance comparisons presented in Section VI.

III. CMOS DECODER CELL DESIGNS
Let us first consider the basic principle according to which the decoder circuits, discussed in following sections, operate. As illustrated in the example of Fig. 4, the parity check matrix is mapped into the states of memristors in a nanowire crossbar. Assume that we now keep the horizontal nanowires at a fixed voltage, while driving to a higher voltage the vertical nanowires corresponding to logical ones in an input codeword. This results in a current flow through every memristor located at a driven vertical wire. At horizontal wire , the sum current can be written as

(7) (8)

where is the th row of , 1 is a row vector of ones, and is the nonzero voltage across a memristor. If the length of
an input codeword is , then
(9)

Assuming that

, the parity check of row

is obtained as

, which is in the fol-

lowing computed using a parity A/D converter explained below.

Similarly to the above, in the second phase of decoding,

vertical nanowires are kept at a fixed voltage, while the hori-

zontal wires corresponding to failed parity checks are driven to

a higher voltage. As above

(10)

where is the th column of , and is the current at vertical

nanowire . Thresholding

yields an approxima-

tion of (6). In the following subsection we describe a simple

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

POIKONEN et al.: MEMRISTIVE CIRCUITS FOR LDPC DECODING

417

Fig. 5. Operating principle of the analog decoding cell. The decoding phase is

selected by the global control signal RCHK: when

, row checks are

computed, and when

, bit flipping is performed.

each row, a parity analog-to-digital conversion is performed by

comparing the opamp output voltage corresponding to the row

current sum against a ramp voltage signal denoted as

,

Fig. 4. Principle of the considered LDPC decoding. Top: in the parity check phase, modulo-2 sums of currents flowing through memristors in ON-state are computed in parallel for all rows of the nanowire array. Bottom: in parallel for all columns of the nanowire array, bit flip decisions are made based on the numbers of failed parity checks from the first decoding phase.

which goes through the possible row sum values. The result of this comparison is used to gate a D flip flop, whose input varies according to the ramp signal parity. The principle of this parity A/D conversion and the corresponding control signals are

illustrated in Fig. 6. As this process is performed in all CMOS

CMOS circuit which implements the above specified opera- cells simultaneously, this configuration realizes the modulo 2

tions. Note that the condition

matrix multiplication specified in (5).

In the second decoding phase, the global signal

.

(11) The CMOS cells drive the horizontal nanowires according

to the stored check bit values, obtained in the previous de-

sets a fundamental limitation on length of a codeword decod- coding phase. Again, the resulting sum currents at the vertical

able using the considered approach in a monolithic, or nonseg- nanowires—representing the numbers of unsatisfied checks per

mented, nanowire array.

bit—are measured and thresholded. If the measured voltage

A. Current Sum-Based Decoder Cell

is below the global threshold voltage , the codeword bit stored in the JK flip flop is flipped. Over the whole array of cells

Fig. 5 illustrates the structure of a CMOS cell which can be this realizes the operation specified in (6). In each decoding

used in bit flipping decoding of an arbitrary LDPC code. The iteration, the threshold voltage is the same for all CMOS

operating principle of this circuit resembles that of the search cells, but may vary between decoding iterations. Selection of

operation specified and demonstrated for a memristive autoas- predefined threshold voltage sequences is discussed in more

sociative content addressable memory in [12]. A single iteration detail for example in [31].

in the decoding process is divided into two phases which in the Note that in memristive crossbar architectures, as considered

following are referred to as row checks and bit flips.

in this work, sneak path current leakage must be taken into

In the first decoding phase, the global signal

. account. This term refers to undesired current passed through

Each CMOS cell drives its vertical nanowire to if the value memristors connected to nanowires which are not driven to

of the codeword bit stored in the JK flip flop is 1, otherwise the a specific voltage; such currents may disrupt the operation of

vertical nanowire is driven to . Simultaneously, the neg- the circuit. In the current sum-based decoder design described

ative feedback of the op-amp keeps the horizontal nanowires above, sneak path leakage is prevented as in [12] by always

at , and the incoming currents from the vertical nanowire connecting all nanowires either to the virtual ground voltage

drivers are summed and converted into a voltage by the tran-

or to , ensuring that currents are generated only

sresistance opamp circuit. To obtain the parity check values for according to the desired computations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

418

IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 4, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2014

Fig. 6. Principle of the ramp A/D conversion. Top: the comparator inputs are

the opamp output and the ramp voltage; the latter is selected to distinguish

between opamp outputs corresponding to the currents specified in (9).

Middle:

is selected as the parity of the current value of the ramp signal.

Bottom: the output of the comparator gates the D flip flop; once the ramp

voltage falls below the opamp output at the time indicated by the dotted vertical

line, the current logical value of

is stored as the result of the parity

check.

Fig. 7. Principle of computing parity at one horizontal nanowire using digital

logic. At the CMOS cell, resistance is selected to enable voltage division so

that when the vertical nanowire is driven to a high voltage

and the

memristor is in ON-state

, the voltage at the XOR gate input

connected to the horizontal nanowire is higher than the switching threshold of

the XOR gate. Otherwise the voltage at the XOR input remains close to ground.

The other input of the XOR gate is the previous result of the XOR operation

(initially zero). By sequentially driving all vertical nanowires connected to this

horizontal nanowire, the row parity is computed. When inactive, the vertical

nanowires are at high impedance

.

required to compute the row parities. However, this drawback

can be significantly reduced with suitable LDPC code struc-

B. Digital Decoder Cell

tures such as quasi-cyclic codes, where the parity check ma-

trix consists of

submatrices obtained as cyclic shifts

The main advantage of the opamp-based processing de- of an

identity matrix. As demonstrated in Fig. 8 with

scribed above is that it allows summations in current domain,

, with such coding, all vertical nanowires within each

in parallel at all rows or columns of the nanowire array. A block of bits can be driven simultaneously according to their

drawback in this is the analog-to-digital conversion required to associated input bits. Within a block, only one memristor in

process the sum currents: especially in the parity check phase ON-state per horizontal nanowire can be driven, which ensures

there is a tradeoff between the maximum number of different the correct logical value at the XOR input. Thus, only sequen-

current sum levels—corresponding to the row weight of the tial XOR steps are required to compute the parity for all rows.

LDPC code—and the complexity and operation speed of the Note that with QCLDPC codes the parity check matrix and

CMOS cell. As the row parity can be defined as a sequence of its transpose have the same structure. This means that the

logical XOR operations, it is natural to consider its computation above described approach to computing the row parities can be

using digital logic.

applied directly in computing the total numbers of failed parity

Fig. 7 illustrates the principle of a digital decoding cell with checks in parallel over all vertical nanowires. In this case the

a single vertical and a single horizontal nanowire. A reference single XOR gate is replaced with a counter and comparison to a

resistor is used to implement voltage division so that when threshold. Furthermore, due to the use of rectifying memristors

the vertical nanowire is driven with a large voltage and the mem- it is necessary in this case to drive horizontal nanowires corre-

ristor is in ON-state, the XOR gate input connected to the hori- sponding to check bits with logical value 1 to a low voltage ,

zontal nanowire is at a high voltage, corresponding to logical 1. while the reference resistor is connected to a high voltage .

The other input of the XOR gate is connected to a flip flop which Finally, should generally be smaller than the memristor pro-

maintains the result of the previous XOR operation. By sequen- gramming threshold voltage to avoid changing the mem-

tially driving to a high voltage all vertical nanowires cor- ristors’ states during decoding. In the following simulations we

responding to input bits with logical value 1, while keeping all assume

.

other vertical wires at high impedance, the parity over all hor- Fig. 9 shows the structure of a digital decoding cell which op-

izontal nanowires can be computed in parallel. Note however erates according to the principle described above. Resistors

that in this case the memristors must be rectifying, as otherwise and are implemented using NMOS and PMOS transistors in

undesired currents would be passed from horizontal nanowires saturation. The target resistance values for these are specified in

to vertical nanowires in high impedance state, preventing cor- Section IV-B. Selection of the cells which drive their nanowires

rect operation.

at any given time is in Fig. 9 controlled by the signal SEL. In

The main problem with this approach is that while it is pos- practice, small local memory registers and some additional logic

sible to compute the parity of all rows in parallel, steps are can be used to realize this selection.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

POIKONEN et al.: MEMRISTIVE CIRCUITS FOR LDPC DECODING

419

Fig. 8. Example of a block-based LDPC code structure allowing parallelization of parity check computation over vertical nanowires. The parity check matrix is divided into submatrices, or blocks, of size 4 4, where the row weight of each submatrix is one. The parity checks are now performed by allowing vertical nanowires to be driven only in one code block at a time. Thus the current at any horizontal nanowire may only be close to zero—corresponding to a low voltage at the corresponding CMOS cell’s XOR gate input—or close to that passed by a single memristor in ON-state—corresponding to a high voltage at the XOR input. In this example, input bits one and three have logical value one, which results in significant current at horizontal nanowires one and three, as the first code block is as identity matrix. The memristors must be rectifying, as otherwise stray currents would flow from horizontal wires to vertical wires in high impedance state through memristors in ON-state.

Fig. 10. Simulation example of analog decoding. Mean comparator input volt-

ages (solid lines) and their standard deviations (shaded areas) obtained from 10

Monte Carlo simulations are plotted for 20 decoding cells along with the global

ramp/threshold signal

(dashed line). In the first 50 ns, the input bits

are programmed to the cells; during this time the comparator inputs are undeter-

mined, which explains the large standard deviations of the input voltages. After

this initialization, two decoding iterations are shown. The input vector contains

one erroneous bit, which is seen in the first row check phase as odd-valued com-

parator inputs. The single error is corrected in the first bit flip phase, and in the

second row check phase all comparator inputs are even-valued.

A. Circuit Simulations Using a 130 nm CMOS Technology

Decoding circuits corresponding to LDPC codeword lengths

20, 40, and 80 bits were simulated using 130 nm CMOS tech-

nology with

. Memristors were modeled using

fixed-valued resistors and capacitors selected according to the

device characteristics specified in Section II-C.

Fig. 10 illustrates the operation of the analog decoding cell

outlined in Section III-A. Decoding is here demonstrated using

a QCLDPC code with a 15 20 parity check matrix with row

weight

and column weight

, with one erroneous

bit in the input codeword. Fig. 10 shows the comparator input

voltages in all 20 CMOS cells over two decoding iterations. The

ramp signal used as a threshold in both the parity check and the

bit flip phase is depicted as the dashed curve. The colored line

plots are averages over 10 Monte Carlo simulations taking de-

vice mismatch into account; the sample standard deviation of

each voltage curve is presented by a shaded area. Here, we do

Fig. 9. Operating principle of the digital decoding cell. The global signal RCHK functions as in the analog decoder cell of Fig. 5. The local control signal SEL is used to select whether or not the cell drives its vertical (horizontal) nanowire in the row check (bit flip) phase. The JK and D flip flops store the input bits and parity check bits, respectively.

not consider the variances of the memristors’ ON and OFF resistances; the effect of inaccuracy in memristor programming with respect to the accuracy required for correct operation of the analog decoding cell is analyzed in detail in Section V. Fig. 10 shows how the decoder corrects the input codeword in a single

iteration, with a decoding iteration duration of 100 ns. This con-

IV. SIMULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

sists of 70 ns for the parity check phase, and 30 ns for the bit flip phase.

In the following, we first present simulation results for the CMOS cells described in the previous section. The main objective in these simulations is to verify that the circuits operate as intended, and to obtain area and power consumption estimates for the considered CMOS cells, corresponding to a specific technology. In the second subsection below, we estimate analytically the average power and energy consumption of the consid-

Note that in the considered example with row weight four, the

separation between voltage levels with the presented decoder

circuit is larger than

, and typically the row weights

in well performing LDPC codes are of order 10 or less. For

example, in [33] quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with row weight 8

which perform within 1 dB of the optimal random code bound

are presented. Thus in practically significant decoding cases

the required voltage separation is of the order of several tens

ered decoding approaches as functions of the code parameters of millivolts, achieved even by the presented simple CMOS

and assumed hardware characteristics.

cell design. Of course, practical circuits will contain also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

420

IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 4, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2014

other sources of error than the considered device mismatch. In 1) Opamp-Based Decoding Cell: From (7), the mean current

Section V-A we determine the required resolution, taking into at row of the nanowire array in the parity check phase is

account the worst-case effects of memristor programming inac-

curacy, nonzero nanowire resistance, and statistical variation in

the input Hamming weight in the current sum-based decoder.

The digital decoding cell of Fig. 9 was also simulated using

130 nm technology. The memristor characteristics were as-

sumed to be the same as with the analog decoding cell, with the additional assumption that the memristors are rectifying. The counter/threshold logic block was realized in this example as a three-bit adder and register whose carry overflow bit is used as the flipping indicator corresponding to a global three-bit threshold signal. With the digital decoder, circuit

As this mean current is the same for all rows, we may leave out the index . Since vertical nanowires are driven to voltage , and there are in total active rows in the nanowire array, the mean total power consumption of the opamp-based decoder can be written as

simulations corresponding to a QCLDPC code with row weight

4, column weight 3, and codeword length 20 were performed.

With this code length, the duration of both the XOR and the

counter/threshold operation over a block of

bits

was 2.5 ns. As one full decoding iteration consists here of four

sequential XOR operations and three additions, the simulated

minimum duration of one decoding iteration is 17.5 ns. A 400

MHz clock frequency is sufficient for both of the considered

decoding approaches; in the opamp-based analog decoder this

clock frequency allows for switching between the required

(12)

where

is the mean power consumed by a single CMOS

cell and

is the voltage across each mem-

ristor connected to a vertical nanowire whose input data bit has

value 1.

With similar reasoning, the mean total power consumed in

the second decoding phase is

ramp voltage levels shown in Fig. 10.

The simulated average power consumption of the opamp-

based CMOS cell is approximately

; most of this power

is consumed by the opamp and subsequent comparator. The av-

erage power consumption of the digital decoding cell is approx-

imately

. Circuit areas of the CMOS cells were estimated

(13)

where

is the number of failed parity checks, that is, rows

driven to .

Based on the above, we obtain the mean energy required per

using a layout tool to place all transistors without wiring inside decoded bit as

a minimal area. For the opamp-based cell, this minimum area

was

; to approximate the total area require-

(14)

ment we double these dimensions, obtaining an area estimate of

, or

. The individual components re-

quiring most circuit area are the opamp and the associated feed-

back resistor. For the digital decoding cell, the corresponding

minimal area estimate is

, yielding an approxi-

mate total area of

.

where

is the duration of the first decoding phase,

is the duration of the second decoding phase, and

is

the number of decoding iterations performed—this number

depends on the bit error probability of the input data. We take

into account the increase of capacitance along with code length

by selecting the phase durations as

B. Performance Analyses

and

, according to the simulated decoding

In the following, we estimate analytically the minimum power consumption and energy per decoded bit corresponding to the decoding principles described in Section III. The power consumption in the full CMOL decoder circuit can be divided into power dissipated in the memristors and resistive CMOS cell elements along the measured current path, and power consumed by other circuit elements in the CMOS cells. The CMOS cell power consumption depends on the specific implementation and technology used in the cells; in the following we assume the values given in the previous subsection.

phase durations and time constants consisting of the Thevenin resistance of the current path in the two decoding phases, and the total nanowire capacitance as specified in Section II-C.
2) Digital Decoding Cell: In the digital decoding circuit, mean current at a given nanowire is equal either to the current passed through a block of wires with no memristor in ON-state driven, or to the current passed through a block with a single memristor in ON-state driven. The mean block resistances equivalent to these cases in the parity check phase are

For estimating the power consumption in the memristors, in

the following we assume that the CMOL circuit is configured

according to an and column weights

parity check matrix with constant row and , respectively, and that a bit in the

and

input codeword has value 1 with probability 0.5. These assump-

tions are made only to simplify the following analytical ex-

pressions; the results are easily generalized for arbitrary parity

check matrices and input codewords. We first consider the per- The total resistance between the driven voltage and

formance of the opamp-based decoder, and repeat the analysis ground for a single nanowire is then

or

,

for the digital decoder.

where is the reference resistor from Fig. 7.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

POIKONEN et al.: MEMRISTIVE CIRCUITS FOR LDPC DECODING

421

According to our initial assumptions, in the parity check

phase, the block resistances

and

occur with equal

probability. Thus, the mean total power consumption over all

horizontal nanowires can be estimated as

(15)

Note, however, that this expression is only an approximation, as it is a nonlinear function of mean resistance values. Furthermore, to maximize the voltage swing at the XOR gate input, the target value for the reference resistor is selected as

(16)
Following a similar reasoning as in the above, the mean total power consumption in the second decoding phase can be approximated as

Fig. 11. Analytical estimates of the mean power dissipated in memristors and reference resistors in the CMOS cells, compared to corresponding numerical simulation results obtained as averages over 100 different input vectors and error patterns.

(17)

where

is the mean number of failed parity checks in

a code block of length , and we assume that

is

small compared to . The mean energy consumption per bit is

obtained also for the digital decoder from (13). The increase of

capacitance along with code length is again taken into account,

selecting the phase durations now as

and

. Again,

is

computed according to the Thevenin resistance of the current

path in the decoding phases, and the total nanowire capacitance.

3) Performance Estimation: In the following we show examples of performance estimates obtained using the analytical results presented above. In these examples, QCLDPC codes with

Fig. 12. Mean total power consumption estimates obtained from (12), (13),

(15), and (17), including CMOS cell power dissipation estimates

obtained

with HSPICE for a 130 nm technology.

row weight

and column weight

, and lengths

varying from 20 bits to 1000 bits are assumed. To estimate

the power consumed in the second decoding phase, in the fol- duced by (12), (13), (15), and (17), taking into account the rela-

lowing we assume that each codeword contains one erroneous tive durations of the decoding phases and the CMOS cell power

bit, which produces failed parity checks, and is corrected in consumption estimates obtained with HSPICE for a 130 nm

one decoding iteration.

technology.

Fig. 11 illustrates the magnitudes and accuracies of the re- Throughput estimates of the two decoding approaches are

sistive power dissipation estimates (assuming

) presented in Fig. 13. These results illustrate how the operating

provided by (12), (13), (15), and (17). The analytical estimates speed of the blockwise sequential digital decoding is reduced as

are compared to results from numerical simulations, where av- the codeword length—and corresponding total nanowire capac-

erage power dissipations were determined by computing the itance defined in Section II-C—increases. With the code lengths

currents and total resistances corresponding to 100 randomly considered in these examples, the throughput of the opamp-

chosen input vectors and error patterns. As noted above, (15) based decoder is limited mainly by the operating speed of the

does not produce an exact estimate of the mean power dissipa- operational amplifier. This means that the throughput increases

tion, but the estimation error is relatively small. The other ana- along with codeword length, as more data is processed in par-

lytical estimates are accurate. It is also evident that the resistive allel in each decoding iteration, while the duration of an iter-

power dissipation in the digital decoder is smaller than in the ation remains approximately constant. Note that the presented

opamp-based decoder, because a smaller number of nanowires throughput estimates are optimistic in the sense that they do not

is driven at any given time in the digital decoder than in the include the time required for storing the input bits in the CMOS

opamp-based decoder.

cells.

Fig. 12 shows the mean total power dissipation for both de- Finally, Fig. 14 presents the estimated energy consumption

coding approaches, obtained by combining the estimates pro- per decoded bit for the considered examples. Results are shown

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

422

IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 4, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2014

specifically designed for fast and robust operation instead of low power consumption.
The above presented analytical performance estimates can be applied with any LDPC code. In Section VI we compare estimated performance metrics of the considered digital decoding approach with similar LDPC decoders presented in recent publications. However, we first consider the effects of circuit nonidealities on decoding reliability.

V. EFFECTS OF NONIDEALITIES

Fig. 13. Decoder maximum throughput estimates obtained using the total nanowire capacitance defined in Section II-C. The shown values correspond to a single decoding iteration; throughput estimates for larger numbers of iterations can be obtained by dividing these results by the number of iterations.

A. Allowable Variation in Memristances and Nanowire Resistance With Limited-Precision Processing

Let us consider LDPC codes of length

with

row weight

, and denote the number of driven vertical

nanowires in the parity check phase by . This is equal to the

Hamming weight of an input codeword. Assuming that input

data statistically follows the binomial distribution with

,

it follows that

.

Furthermore, let us denote by

the number of memristors

in ON-state at vertical nanowires corresponding to codeword

bits 1 at a given horizontal nanowire, and by

the corre-

sponding nominal current

where

and

refer to the nominal currents through

memristors in ON and OFF state, respectively, at vertical

nanowires corresponding to input bit 1.

We account for variation in circuit characteristics affecting

the parity check phase in the opamp-based decoder as follows.

We assume that memristors can be programmed to ON-state

with a relative conductance error less than or equal to . We

define the OFF-ON resistance ratio to measure the achiev-

able ratio of resistances in the two states. Thus, we here assume

that a memristor in OFF-state has resistance equal to or larger

Fig. 14. Decoding energy consumption estimates according to (14) for both considered decoder cell designs with and without simulated CMOS cell power consumption.

than

, but otherwise does not have to be accurately pro-

grammed, that is, the OFF-resistance can take any value from

to infinity. Finally, we denote the maximum nanowire

resistance relative to the nominal memristor ON-resistance by

with and without the simulated CMOS cell power consumption terms in (12), (13), (15), and (17). These results demonstrate that the digital decoder is more energy efficient than the opampbased decoder, despite the larger throughputs obtainable with the latter.
To summarize the above discussed results, we demon-

.

Due to the above described variation in circuit characteris-

tics and random variation of , the current at a given hori-

zontal nanowire will differ from the nominal value. We denote

the corresponding nonideal currents as

, and estimate the

worst-case maximum and minimum currents as

strated that with the considered LDPC codes, the digital

decoder—taking into account resistive power dissipation and

simulated CMOS cell power consumption—is estimated to

(18)

have the better overall performance of the two designs. It achieves average power consumptions of order 1–10 mW,

(19)

throughputs of order 1 Gbit/s, and energy efficiencies of order 1 pJ/bit. It should be noted that here we focus strictly on the core decoding circuits, ignoring peripheral circuitry and operations.
The power consumption with both of the considered decoding approaches is dominated by the power consumption of the CMOS circuit elements. There is margin for improvement

In (18), every driven ON-state memristor is assumed to be in a maximally conducting state, the input Hamming weight is larger than average by the assumed maximum 70, and the total nanowire resistance is assumed to be zero. In (19), we assume that each memristor in ON-state is programmed to the least con-

in the energy efficiency of these decoders using more refined ducting state possible, that all memristors in OFF-state have

circuit designs. For example, the opamp utilized here was infinite resistance, and that the nanowire resistance for every

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

POIKONEN et al.: MEMRISTIVE CIRCUITS FOR LDPC DECODING

423

larger variation in nanowire resistance and memristor program-

ming. For example, the decoder operates correctly with proba-

bility larger than

on code blocks of length 250 even

with maximum relative ON-state programming error of order

10% and maximum nanowire resistance of order

.

B. Stuck Open and Stuck Closed-Type Defects

Fig. 15. Estimation of circuit parameter values with which a parity check may fail in less than one codeword per ten billion, assuming four and six bit A/D converter resolutions and OFF-ON resistance ratios 1000 and 2000 for a current sum-based decoding cell with an LDPC code of length 500. Note that the correspondence between line type and nanowire resistance specified in the legend applies to all curves.

current path is equal to

. Note that the above assumed

values for total nanowire resistance are severely pessimistic.

To guarantee correct operation of the decoder in the parity

check phase, the following must hold:

(20)

In addition to inaccurate programming, the considered de-

coders may be affected by device defects in the nanowire array.

We model these as memristors that are stuck open—assumed to

be permanently in OFF or logical 0-state—with probability ,

or stuck closed—permanently in ON or logical 1-state—with

probability .

The probability that a stuck open-type defect will cause

at least one error in the

parity check matrix of any LDPC

code is

(21)

where is again the mean row weight of the code. The corresponding error probability for stuck closed-type defects is

(22)

The probabilities specified in (21) and (22) are significant even with very low defect probabilities and . However, it should be noted that these are not equal to the probability of bit error in the output of the decoder. For example, the probability of a stuck open defect causing a change on one row of , which may cause an erroneous parity check depending on the input data, is

where is the bit resolution of the analog-to-digital converter

(23)

in the decoding cell.

To demonstrate the accuracy requirements of the opamp-

based decoder cell to achieve practically error-free operation,

we fix the A/D converter resolution to values

and

If we assume that each such error always causes an erroneous parity check, the number of detected failed parity checks per bit, denoted by , follows a binomial distribution

, and plot for varying row weight the maximum allow-

able relative ON-state programming error for line resistance

(24)

values

,

, and

. This analysis is

illustrated in Fig. 15. The results show that with the value

estimated for

in Section II-C3, an A/D converter with

four bit resolution is sufficient to guarantee correct operation

for a code with row weight 8, if the maximum relative mem-

ristor programming error is less than approximately 0.6%.

Increased A/D conversion accuracy allows for more error in

With relatively low error rates, it is reasonable to assume that an erroneous bit in the input will cause failed parity checks. With this assumption, we can assume that the flipping threshold is equal to , and a correct bit in the input will be classified erroneously by the decoder due to stuck open defects with probability

memristor programming and larger nanowire resistance. We

also show the results of the above analysis with an OFF-ON

(25)

resistance ratio 2000; increasing this ratio effectively reduces

the A/D conversion resolution required for error-free operation. The above described reasoning applies also for stuck closed-

Note that memristor programming with less than 1% error has type defects, resulting in

been demonstrated empirically for example in [25] with target

resistances of order

.

(26)

The above described analysis applies with minor modifica-

tions also to the digital decoder cell. As in this case the decoder and

is assumed to process smaller submatrices with fixed row weight

1, the decoder operates practically without errors despite much

(27)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

424

IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 4, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2014

TABLE I COMPARISON OF THE CONSIDERED MEMRISTIVE DECODING, USING THE DIGITAL CMOL CELL DESIGN SPECIFIED IN SECTION III-B,
WITH CONVENTIONAL CMOS DECODERS. NOTE THAT THE TWO DIFFERENT SETS OF PERFORMANCE ESTIMATES GIVEN FOR THE MEMRISTIVE DECODER CORRESPOND TO THE TWO DIFFERENT CODES USED IN THE REFERENCES. THESE PERFORMANCE ESTIMATES ARE OBTAINED USING THE FORMULAS SPECIFIED FOR THE DIGITAL MEMRISTIVE DECODER IN SECTION IV

here, comparing BER versus SNR performances is not rele-

vant, since—ignoring the possibility of hardware malfunctions,

which were in this work considered in Section V—the BER per-

formance of bit flipping is essentially not dependent on the hard-

ware implementation of the algorithm. Based on the operating

parameters above and equations (15), (17), and (14), we obtain

the performance measures presented in Table I. These results in-

dicate that the digital memristive decoding approach yields an

energy consumption per decoded bit approximately 1.8 times

that reported in [18], but also a throughput approximately 5.5

times that of the reference. Note that as in this work, the results

presented in [18] are based on simulations of the considered de-

coding circuitry, not measurements of fabricated circuits.

Fig. 16. Probability of parity check errors per bit, caused by stuck open (SO)

It is also relevant to note that the decoder reported in [18]

or stuck closed (SC)-type defects.

is designed for a fixed LDPC code. It is not trivial to design

integrated decoder circuits which operate efficiently with arbi-

Fig. 16 illustrates the probabilities specified in (25) and (27) for code lengths 100, 500, and 1000, and various code parameters. Note that increasing the row and column weights of a code significantly reduces the probability of erroneous parity checks corresponding to a correct input bit.

trary LDPC codes, as the routing and corresponding data scheduling between decoding nodes can become very complicated, especially with large code sizes and codes with high row or column weights. To demonstrate the energy performance gain of the considered simple bit flipping decoding with respect to a more complicated decoding algorithm in a programmable de-

coder, in Table I we also compare performance estimates ob-

VI. COMPARISONS TO EXISTING DECODERS

tained for the digital CMOL-based decoder with the LDPC decoder circuit presented in [34]. This comparison is justified in

In Table I, the digital memristive decoder is compared to a the sense that the reference decoder is also fully programmable,

state-of-the-art digital CMOS implementation [18] of similar bit utilizes the same kind of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes as assumed in

flipping decoding as considered in this work. In [18], the authors this work, and is implemented with 130 nm CMOS technology.

consider ultra-low-power LDPC decoders realized with 65 nm However, the reference decoder performs min-sum (MS) de-

technology; they also predict that a digital subthreshold imple- coding which, as illustrated in Fig. 3, is significantly better in

mentation of the considered decoder will provide an approx- terms of error correction capability than the bit flipping consid-

imately 30-fold reduction in power consumption. Power con- ered in this work. The related performance tradeoffs were dis-

sumption and throughput in [18] are given for a code of length cussed in more detail in Section III.

512 bits at bit error rate (BER) equal to

after decoding; However, the performance estimates presented in Table I in-

for this code, the corresponding signal-to-noise power ratio is dicate that the bit flipping decoder yields a data throughput of

reported approximately as 7 dB. For comparison with the re- order 10 times that reported in [34], and power consumption

sults presented in [18], we apply a QCLDPC code of length 500 and energy per decoded bit approximately 30% and 2%, respec-

bits.

tively, of that of the reference. Of course, some implementation

The considered code reaches a BER of

at an SNR of margin must be assumed in all of these figures, as our results are

approximately 8 dB, and at this operation point,

based on simulations and analytical estimates, while the refer-

and

. Please note that for the BF decoders discussed ence results are measured.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

POIKONEN et al.: MEMRISTIVE CIRCUITS FOR LDPC DECODING

425

VII. CONCLUSION

correction functionality with relatively little increase in CMOL

A. Further Work

circuit complexity or cell area.

The decoder design principle considered in this work pro-

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

vides many topics for further studies. A direct continuation of The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for

this work would be to refine the simple CMOS cell designs con- their comments and suggestions.

sidered, especially with the aim of reducing power consumption. Also, the considered decoding principle can be used to implement more complicated decoding algorithms such as soft bit flipping [30], [31], allowing a tradeoff between CMOS cell complexity and bit error rate performance.
Finally, although we have not discussed memristive stateful logic in this paper, the topic is relevant also to the work performed here. For example, the digital decoding approach considered in this work operates using a similar principle as multiinput memristive stateful logic operations, whose principles and

REFERENCES

[1] L. O. Chua, “Memristor—The missing circuit element,” IEEE Trans.

Circuit Theory, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 507–519, Sep. 1971.

[2] L. Chua, “Resistance switching memories are memristors,” Appl. Phys.

A, vol. 102, no. 4, pp. 765–783, 2011.

[3] S. H. Jo, T. Chang, I. Ebong, B. B. Bhadviya, P. Mazumder, and W. Lu,

“Nanoscale memristor device as synapse in neuromorphic systems,”

Nano Lett., vol. 10, pp. 1297–1301, 2010.

[4] M.-J. Lee, C. B. Lee, S. R. Lee, M. Chang, J. H. Hur, Y.-B. Kim, C.-J.

Kim, D. H. Seo, S. Seo, U.-I. Chung, I.-K. Yoo, and K. Kim, “A fast,

high-endurance and scalable non-volatile memory device made from

asymmetric

bilayer structures,” Nature Mater.,

practical realization are described in detail in [16], [17]. It would be relevant to investigate further the design of LDPC decoders using memristive stateful logic. Based on the work presented in

vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 625–630, 2011. [5] K.-H. Kim, S. H. Jo, and W. Lu, “Nanoscale resistive memory with
intrinsic diode characteristics and long endurance,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 96, no. 5, pp. 053 106–053 106-3, Feb. 2010.

this paper, we find that a stateful logic decoder implementation using the same kind of monolithic nanowire crossbar as in this work is not reasonable, since the necessary XOR logic can be

[6] K.-H. Kim, S. Gaba, D. Wheeler, J. M. Cruz-Albrecht, T. Hussain, N. Srinivasa, and W. Lu, “A functional hybrid memristor crossbar-array/ CMOS system for data storage and neuromorphic applications,” Nano Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 389–395, 2012.

implemented more efficiently as CMOS gates. However, the use of partitioned nanowire crossbars as considered in [17] might produce interesting possibilities for error correction in memory.
B. Summary
We have presented design principles for implementing decoders for low-density parity check codes in CMOL-type memristive circuits. The CMOL circuit architecture is designed to yield programmable, nonvolatile, and area efficient connectivity between CMOS processing elements; in this work, the programmable connections were used to map the parity check matrix of an LDPC code in the decoder. The considered LDPC decoder examples are based on matrix-vector multiplication, implemented using two different approaches: analog correlation based on Ohm’s law and Kirchoff’s current law, and

[7] J. Nickel, “Memristor materials engineering: From flash replacement towards a universal memory,” in IEEE IEDM Adv. Memory Technol. Workshop, Washington, DC, 2011, pp. 1–3.
[8] H. Nazarian, Crossbar resistive memory: The future technology for NAND flash 2013 [Online]. Available: http://www.crossbar-inc. com/assets/img/media/Crossbar-RRAM-Technology-Whitepaper080413.pdf
[9] K. K. Likharev and D. B. Strukov, “CMOL: Devices, circuits, and architectures,” in Introducing Molecular Electronics, G. Cuniberti, G. Fagas, and K. Richter, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2005, pp. 447–478.
[10] K. Likharev, A. Mayr, I. Muckra, and O. Türel, “Crossnets: High-performance neuromorphic architectures for CMOL circuits,” Ann. NY Acad. Sci., vol. 1006, pp. 146–163, 2003.
[11] G. S. Snider, “Self-organized computation with unreliable, memristive nanodevices,” Nanotechnology, vol. 18, p. 365202, 2007.
[12] E. Lehtonen, J. H. Poikonen, M. Laiho, and P. Kanerva, “Large-scale memristive associative memories,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale (VLSI) Syst., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 562–574, Mar. 2014.
[13] E. Lehtonen, J. H. Poikonen, and M. Laiho, “Two memristors suffice

corresponding digital processing, achieved by setting specific constraints on the LDPC code structure.
We performed detailed performance analysis and circuit sim-

to compute all Boolean functions,” Electron. Lett., no. 3, p. 239, 2010. [14] J. H. Poikonen, E. Lehtonen, and M. Laiho, “On synthesis of Boolean
expressions for memristive devices using sequential implication logic,” IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 31, no.

ulations of the example decoders considered in the work, and estimated how CMOL and memristor characteristics will affect decoder operation. Most significantly, the maximum code-

7, pp. 1129–1134, Jul. 2012. [15] S. Kvatinsky, G. Satat, N. Wald, E. Friedman, A. Kolodny, and U.
Weiser, “Memristor-based material implication (IMPLY) logic: Design principles and methodologies,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale (VLSI)

word or code block length is limited by the ratio of the memristors’ OFF and ON resistances. We also estimated how the operation speed of the decoders depends on the total capacitance

Syst., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 2054–2066, Oct. 2014. [16] E. Lehtonen, J. H. Poikonen, and M. Laiho, “Memristive stateful
logic,” in Memristor Networks, A. Adamatzky and L. Chua, Eds. New York: Springer, 2014.

in the nanowire array, and analyzed how variation in memristance values, nonzero nanowire resistances, and persistent device defects affect the computation of correlations. Note that these analyses are relevant also in other parallel CMOL-type computing applications.
Regarding the main objectives of this work, based on currently available empirical data on CMOL and memristor characteristics, we found that LDPC decoding in CMOL-type circuit architectures is viable, and enables programmable, energy efficient decoding. In CMOL architectures where multiple vertically stacked nanowire arrays are available, as assumed for example in [12], the considered approach facilitates adding error

[17] E. Lehtonen, J. Tissari, J. H. Poikonen, M. Laiho, and L. Koskinen, “A cellular computing architecture for parallel memristive stateful logic,” Microelectron. J., 2014.
[18] C. Winstead and J. N. Rodrigues, “Ultra-low-power error correction circuits: Technology scaling and sub- operation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 59-II, no. 12, pp. 913–917, Dec. 2012.
[19] K. Ganesan, P. Grover, and J. Rabaey, “The power cost of over-designing codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2011, pp. 128–133.
[20] K. Ganesan, Y. Wen, P. Grover, A. Goldsmith, and J. Rabaey, “Choosing green codes by simulation-based modeling of implementations,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2012, pp. 3286–3292.
[21] B. Smith, “Error-correcting codes for fibre-optic communication systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 2011.
[22] D. B. Strukov, G. S. Snider, D. R. Stewart, and R. S. Williams, “The missing memristor found,” Nature, vol. 453, pp. 80–83, 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

426

IEEE JOURNAL ON EMERGING AND SELECTED TOPICS IN CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 4, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2014

[23] S. H. Jo, K. H. Kim, and W. Lu, “Programmable resistance switching in nanoscale two-terminal devices,” Nano Lett., vol. 9, pp. 496–500, 2009.
[24] M. Laiho and E. Lehtonen, “Arithmetic operations within memristor-based analog memory,” in Proc. 12th Int. Workshop Cellular Nanoscale Networks Appl., Berkeley, CA, 2010, pp. 1–4.
[25] F. Alibart, L. Gao, B. D. Hoskins, and D. B. Strukov, “High precision tuning of state for memristive devices by adaptable variation-tolerant algorithm,” Nanotechnology vol. 23, no. 7, p. 075201, 2012.
[26] D. B. Strukov and R. S. Williams, “Four-dimensional address topology for circuits with stacked multilayer crossbar arrays,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 106, no. 48, pp. 20155–20158, 2009.
[27] G. S. Snider and R. S. Williams, “Nano/CMOS architectures using a field-programmable nanowire interconnect,” Nanotechnology, vol. 18, no. 3, 2007.
[28] D. J. C. MacKay, Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[29] K. Yu, L. Shu, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[30] X. Wu, C. Ling, M. Jiang, E. Xu, C. Zhao, and X. You, “New insights into weighted bit-flipping decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2177–2180, Aug. 2009.
[31] J. Cho, J. Kim, and W. Sung, “VLSI implementation of a high-throughput soft-bit-flipping decoder for geometric LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1083–1094, May 2010.
[32] R. Gallager, “The random coding bound is tight for the average code (corresp.),” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 244–246, Mar. 1973.
[33] G. Liva, W. Ryan, and M. Chiani, “Quasi-cyclic generalized LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 49–57, Jan. 2008.
[34] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, and A.-Y. Wu, “A real-time programmable LDPC decoder chip for arbitrary QC-LDPC parity check matrices,” in IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf., Nov. 2009, pp. 369–372.
Jussi H. Poikonen received the M.Sc. and D.Sc. (Tech.) degrees in telecommunications from University of Turku, Turku, Finland, in 2005 and 2009, respectively.
In 2009–2011, he worked as Special Researcher and Lecturer at University of Turku, and since 2011 has worked as an Academy of Finland post-doctoral Researcher at the Department of Communications and Networking at Aalto University, Espoo, Finland. His research interests include computing in memristive circuits, and wireless communication systems and algorithms.

Eero Lehtonen received the M.Sc. degree in mathematics, and the D.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from University of Turku, Turku, Finland, in 2006 and 2013, respectively.
His current research interests include application of memristive computing in massively parallel mixed-mode processing architectures, and event-based machine learning in low-power embedded systems. He is an Academy of Finland postdoctoral researcher at the Technology Research Center, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
Mika Laiho (M’04) received the M.Sc., Lic.Sc., and D.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from Aalto University, Espoo, Finland, in 1999, 2001, and 2003, respectively.
In November 2003 he started as a Postdoctoral Researcher at University of Turku, Finland. Since 2008 he has acted as an Adjunct Professor at University of Turku, where he currently holds an Academy of Finland research fellowship. He has published more than 100 papers in the areas of analog/mixed-mode processor arrays and massively parallel sensing/computing. His current research interests are in harnessing emerging memory technologies to computing, especially using locally connected architectures and associative memory for cognitive tasks.
Jonne K. Poikonen (S’03–M’07) received the M.Sc. degree in electronics and telecommunication and the D.Sc. (Tech.) degree in microelectronics from the University of Turku, Turku, Finland, in 2001 and 2006, respectively.
He is currently a Senior Research Fellow with Technology Research Center, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, and is also the CEO of Kovilta Oy, Salo, Finland. His research interests include analog and mixed-mode circuit design for integrated parallel processor systems and smart sensors, image processing algorithms and applications, as well as emerging nanoelectronics technologies.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:40:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

