ICSP2012 Proceedings
Reliability-Based High-Efficient Dynamic Schedules for Belief Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes

Lijun Zhang School of Electr. & Info. Eng.
Beijing Jiaotong Univ. Beijing, 100044, China Email: ljzhang@bjtu.edu.cn

Jie Huang VIA Telecom Beijing, 100084, China Email: josehuang@via-telecom.com

L. L. Cheng Dept. of Electr. Eng. City Univ. of Hong Kong Hong Kong, China Email: itacheng@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract—Four reliability-based high-efficient dynamic schedules (RHDS) for belief propagation (BP) decoding of low-density parity-check codes are proposed. The RHDS only processes one variable (or check) node, which has the maximum relative residual among all the variable (or check) nodes in each decoding iteration, thus keeping less greediness and decreasing complexity in comparison with egde-wise variable-to-check residual belief propagation (VC-RBP) algorithm. Simulation results show that RHDS’s convergence rate is higher than VC-RBP while still keeping very low computational complexity.
Keywords—dynamic schedules; belief propagtion (BP); LDPC codes
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have the potential of approaching Shannon limit with the iterative beliefpropagation (BP) algorithm. The message passing schedule over the Tanner graph directly affects convergence rate, complexity and error performance. The standard decoding schedule is a version of the so-called flooding schedule [1], in which all the variable nodes, and subsequently all the check nodes, pass new messages to their neighbors in each iteration. Besides the flooding schedule, some versions of non-flooding schedules or serial schedules for iterative BP decoding were proposed, such as check-node updating schedules [2] and variable-node updating schedules [3]. The serial schedules converge twice faster than flooding in terms of number of iterations. Various improvements on serial schedules have been proposed for keeping lower complexity [4].
Contrary to above strategies with predetermined schedule at each iteration, recently, some dynamic update schedules based on residual were introduced recently, where the difference between the values of the message before and after an update is used for dynamically updating the schedule [5–7]. Among others, variable-to-check residual belief propagation (VC-RBP) can accelerate the convergence of the decoding faster than standard serial schedules [6]. However, VC-RBP has drawbacks both in the error correcting performance for its greediness and in the decoding complexity yet.
In this paper, four node-wise reliability-based high-efficient dynamic schedules (RHDS) for BP decoding of LDPC codes are proposed. The effect of reliability is considered in all of the schedules, which can keep less greediness and help to accelerate the convergence. Besides the more accurate residual metric, ___________________________________
978-1-4673-2197-6/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

node instead of edge is selected to update, which further lowers the computation complexity. Experimental evidences show that variable node-RHDS (VN-RHDS) and Min VN-RHDS (MVNRHDS) can improve the greediness better than check nodeRHDS (CN-RHDS) and Min CN-RHDS (MCN-RHDS) by propagating first the message which has the largest residual based on all the check equations [6].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, we briefly review schedule for LDPC codes. In section III, CN-RHDS, VN-RHDS, MCN-RHDS and MVN-RHDS are introduced. Experimental results to show clearly advantages of using four new dynamic schedules are presented in section IV, and section V gives the concluding remarks.

II. SCHEDULE

The LDPC codes can be represented by a Tanner graph that includes two types of nodes, the variable-nodes and the checknodes. The ith bit is represented by a variable-node vi, and the jth parity check equation by a check-node cj. The order of exchanging messages between the variable-nodes and checknodes is referred to as a schedule.
We define

φ(x) = − log(tanh(x/2)),

and let N (·) denote the set of neighboring nodes of node · in the graph. The channel information of vi given the received yi can be formulated as

Lvi

=

log

p(yi|vi p(yi|vi

= =

0) 1)

.

The flooding is a two-phase iterative schedule, namely, phases P1 and P2 [8]. Below is the flow of the flooding schedule.

P1: do for each cj

(a) Update check-equation probability information Rcj

by

⎛

⎞

Rcj = φ−1 ⎝

φ(Qvacj )⎠ ,

(1)

va∈N (cj )

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(b) Update the edge messages Rcjvi from node cj to vi

⎛

⎞

Rcj vi = φ−1 ⎝

φ(Qvacj )⎠ , (2)

va∈N (cj )\vi

P2: do for each vi

(a) Update a posteriori probability (APP) messages Qvi by

Qvi =

Rcbvi + Lvi ,

(3)

cb∈N (vi)

(b) Update the edge messages Qvicj from node vi to cj

Qvicj =

Rcbvi + Lvi ,

(4)

cb∈N (vi)\cj

Tentative decoding: Stop if all parity-check equations are satisfied or a preset maximum number of iterations is reached. Otherwise, go to P1.
Under the same decoding complexity, the serial schedule speeds up the convergence when compared to the flooding schedule. For example, joint row-column decoding is a typical serial schedule [9], which incorporates the calculation of the pseudo-posterior probability in the column processing into the row processing, instead of the separate row-column processing in flooding schedule.
In serial schedule, how to get the optimal order of message update which results in the best convergence speed is a challenging problem. The VC-RBP is a strategy that schedules message updates according to the value of the message residual, i.e., the difference between the edge messages Qvicj from node vi to cj before and after an update. The VC-RBP selects the message with maximum residual to update, which speeds up the convergence rate [6].
In order to find the maximum residual, VC-RBP has to compare the residuals among all edge messages Qvicj , which greatly increases the decoding complexity in each iteration. Furthermore, the confidence of node itself is ignored in VCRBP, which should have improved the convergence rate.
III. RELIABILITY-BASED HIGH-EFFICIENT DYNAMIC
SCHEDULE
According to forementioned analysis of VC-RBP, two measures are taken into account in our RHDS. For one hand, a relative residual is adopted instead of absolute residual as in VC-RBP. For another, variable (or check) nodes are used in lieu of edges as candidate, because the number of nodes is much less than edges in a Tanner graph. Based on above considerations, four RHDS’s, namely, check node (CN) based RHDS, variable node (VN) based RHDS, Min CN-RHDS and Min VN-RHDS, are proposed.

A. CN-RHDS
Generally speaking, dynamic decoding schedules include two processes. Firstly some check nodes or variable nodes are selected according to current message state. Then a BP decoding algorithm runs on these nodes. The strategy

cb1

cj

cb2

cb3

cb4

v1k

va1

va2

va3

vk2

vk3

vk4

va5

va6

va7

step one

step two

Fig. 1. Decoding procedure of CN-RHDS.

of choosing check nodes or variable nodes during dynamic decoding iteration directly affects the convergence rate, error performance, and computational complexity.
Two features of BP decoding can be observed as follows.
1) The differences between the messages before and after an update approach zero as the BP decoding converges. A message that has a large residual indicates that it has not converged yet. This characteristic is used in VC-RBP algorithm [6].
2) Some variable nodes achieve high confidence after a few iterations. These nodes are not likely to change their signs in the consequent decoding iterations. The property is grasped in [10].
According to above observations, for those messages with the same residual, propagating the message with less reliability first may help to speed up the convergence rate and reduce the greediness. We define a relative residual as

r(Rc) =

f (Rc) − Rc f (Rc)

,

(5)

where f (Rc) denotes the log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) of check node after an update and Rc the LLR of check node before an update. The update order of nodes is determined by r(Rc). The node that has maximal r(Rc) will be updated first. The schedule is referred to as CN-RHDS.
The procedure of CN-RHDS in a Tanner graph is depicted
in Fig.1. In step one, CN-RHDS finds the largest r(Rc) and selects the related check node. Once the cj with the largest r(Rc) is chosen, the value of r(Rcj )it is set to be zero. Then for all vk ∈ N (cj), Qvkcb with cb ∈ N (vk)\cj will be updated. In step two, Rcbva with va ∈ N (cb)\vk will be renewed to get the corresponding residual r(Rcb ). The CN-RHDS algorithm can be described as
When compared to the VC-RBP algorithm, the complexity
for computing the residual in CN-RHDS is much lower.

B. VN-RHDS
As a greediness-reduced version of CN-RHDS, the VNRHDS for LDPC codes is proposed. Because the message Rcj which has the largest residual is based on only one check equation, CN-RHDS can generate new errors that have to need a large number of message updates to be corrected. However, VN-RHDS propagates first the message which has the largest

2

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 CN-RHDS for LDPC codes

1: initialize all Rcj = 0, Qvicj = Lvi , and

⎛

⎞

Rcj vi = φ−1 ⎝

φ(Qvacj )⎠ ;

va∈N (cj )\vi

2: find the check node which contains the largest r(Rcj ) and

set r(Rcj ) = 0;

3: for each vk ∈ N (cj) do

4: for each cb ∈ N (vk)\cj do

5:

generate and propagate Qvkcb ;

6:

for each va ∈ N (cb)\vk do

7:

compute all Rcbva and r(Rcj );

8:

end for

9: end for

10: end for

11: if all parity-check equations are satisfied or a preset

maximum number of iterations is reached then

12: stop;

13: else

14: go back to step 2;

15: end if

residual based on all check equations. So, VN-RHDS is a less

greedy algorithm compared with CN-RHDS [6]. Similar to the

definition of r(Rc), we define the relative residual of variable

node as

r(Qv) =

f (Qv) − Qv f (Qv)

.

(6)

The procedure of VN-RHDS decoding is shown in Fig.2. The details of VN-RHDS can be presented as follows.

Algorithm 2 VN-RHDS for LDPC codes

1: initialize all Rcjvi = 0 and Qvicj = Lvi ;

2: find the variable node which contains the largest r(Qvi )

and set r(Qvi ) = 0;

3: for each ck ∈ N (vi) do

4: for each va ∈ N (ck)\vi do

5:

generate and propagate Rvkva ;

6:

for each cb ∈ N (va)\ck do

7:

compute all Qvacb and r(Qva );

8:

end for

9: end for

10: end for

11: if all parity-check equations are satisfied or a preset

maximum number of iterations is reached then

12: stop;

13: else

14: go back to step 2;

15: end if

cb1

c1k

ck2

cb2

cb3

v1a

va2

vi
step one

va3

va4

va5

va6

step two

Fig. 2. Decoding procedure of VN-RHDS.

C. MCN-RHDS and MVN-RHDS

To lower complexity further, the min-sum algorithm can be used to compute the min relative residual as follows [11],

R˜cj

=

va ∈N

(cj

)

sgn(Q˜ va cj

)

·

min
va∈N (cj

)(|Q˜ va cj

|),

(7)

Q˜vi =

R˜cbvi + Lvi ,

(8)

cb∈N (vi)

where the tilde indicates the min-sum approximation. Substitute the approximation into (5) and (6), respectively, we get

r(R˜c) =

f (R˜c) − R˜c f (R˜c)

,

(9)

r(Q˜v) =

f (Q˜v) − Q˜v f (Q˜v)

.

(10)

The two equations give the cores Min CN-RHDS and Min VN-RHDS. Note that the min-sum algorithm is only used for residual computation. For the actual propagation of messages, the full update equations (2) and (4) are performed.

D. Computation Complexity
For a regular binary (λ, ρ ) LDPC code with N variable nodes and M check nodes, the variable node degree is λ and check node degree ρ. The computational complexity to get the maximum residual in CN-RHDS, VN-RHDS, MCNRHDS, MVN-RHDS and VC-RBP are summarized in Table I. Obviously, the number of comparison for the four proposed schedules is only a fraction of that for VC-RBP schedule. In addition, the min-sum algorithm used in MVN-RHDS and MCN-RHDS further decreases the complexity of residual computation.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Consider BPSK modulation in AWGN channel, three rate1/2 LDPC codes with length 408, 816 and 2640 are chosen. The maximum iteration number is set to 30 [5]. The frameerror-rate (FER) performance of different BP implementations is shown in Fig.3. It can be seen that the RHDS’s outperform the flooding and the VC-RBP schedules in terms of not only the convergence rate but error performance at medium to high SNR. Furthermore, VN-based RHDS’s achieve faster convergence as well as better performance than CN-based RHDS’s,

3

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY

schedules
VN-RHDS CN-RHDS MVN-RHDS MCN-RHDS VC-RBP

RCS N M N M
λ·N

# per iteration

ROA

ROM

λ2 · (λ − 1) · (ρ − 1)

λ · ρ · (ρ − 1)

λ · (λ − 1) · ρ

ρ2 · (ρ − 1) · (λ − 1)

λ2 · (λ − 1) · (ρ − 1)

λ · (ρ − 1)

λ · (λ − 1) · ρ

ρ · (ρ − 1) · (λ − 1)

λ2 · (λ − 1) · (ρ − 1)

λ · ρ · (ρ − 1)

RCD N M N M N/A

RCS for real comparison subtraction, ROA for real operation addition, ROM for real operation multiplication, and RCD for real comparison division.

MVN/MCN-RHDS performs closely to VN/CN-RHDS while

100

requiring a lower residual computational complexity.

100

10-1

10-1

10-2

Flooding VC-RBP MCN-RHDS MVN-RHDS CN-RHDS VN-RHDS

FER FER

10-2

10-3

10-3

10-4

10-4

Flooding

VC-RBP

MCN-RHDS

10-5

MVN-RHDS

10-5 0

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 Maximum iteration number

CN-RHDS

VN-RHDS

Fig. 4. FER performance of Mackay (408, 204) code under different

10-6 1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

schedules up to maximal iteration number of 50 at Eb/N0 = 3 dB.

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 3. FER performance of Mackay (408, 204) code under different schedules with a maximum iteration number of 30.
Note that VN-RHDS has a gain of about 0.7 dB over VCRBP at FER of 10−4.
Fig.4 shows the FER performance of different BP implementations as the functions of maximum number of iterations at Eb/N0 = 3 dB. It can be easily seen that RHDS’s are superior to flooding and VC-RBP schedules throughout a wide range of iteration numbers.
The codes with lengths 816 and 2640 have similar behaviors, and their performance curves are omitted for concision.
V. CONCLUSION
Four dynamic schedules, CN-RHDS, MCN-RHDS, VNRHDS and MVN-RHDS, are proposed for BP of LDPC decoding. They choose the node with the largest relative residual to update in dynamic decoding iteration. The extra computational complexity keeps much lower as compared with the VC-RBP algorithm. Simulation results show that RHDS’s

can speed up the convergence rate, and achieve better error performance than the flooding and VC-RBP schedules.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by the fundamental research funds for the central universities.
REFERENCES
[1] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, 1998.
[2] M. Rovini et al.,“Layered decoding of non-layered LDPC codes,” Proc. 9th EUROMICRO Conf. on Digital System Design, vol. 15, pp. 537–544, 2006.
[3] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial messagepassing schedule for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, pp. 4076–4091, 2007.
[4] O. Golov and O. Amrani, “Egde-based scheduled BP in LDPC codes,” Proc. IEEE ISIT’07, Nice, France, vol. 50, pp. 476–491, 2007.
[5] S. Kim, K. Ko, and J. Heo, “Two-staged informed dynamic scheduling for sequential belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 13, pp. 193–195, 2009.
[6] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, and H. Y. Song, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 45, pp.117–118, 2009.

4

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[7] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Improving LDPC decoders via informed dynamic scheduling,” Proc. IEEE ITW’07, Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, 2007.
[8] P. Radosavljevic, A. Baynast, and J. R. Cavallaro, “Optimized message passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” Proc. 39th Asilomar Conf. on Signals, Systems and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, USA, vol. 13, pp. 591–595, 2005.
[9] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, “Lowering error floor of LDPC codes using a joint row-column decoding algorithm,” Proc. IEEE ICC’07, Glasgow, Scotland, pp. 920–925, 2007.
[10] E. Zimmermann et al., “Reduced complexity LDPC decoding using forced convergence,” Proc.7th Intl. Symp. Wireless Personal Multimedia Commun. (WPMC’04), Abano Terme, Italy, 2004.
[11] M. Fossorier, M. Mihajevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, 1999.
5
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:25:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

