2012 5th International Conference on BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (BMEI 2012)

An Early Stopping Criterion for LDPC Decoder Based on CMMB Standard

Jun Wang
Information Engineering School Communication University of China
Beijing, China

Jing He
Information Engineering School Communication University of China
Beijing, China

Xinyu Xu
Information Engineering School Communication University of China
Beijing, China

Abstract—In this paper, we present an early stopping criterion for low density parity check (LDPC) codes decoding based on Chinese Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting standard (CMMB) while preserving a good performance. To reduce the average number of decoding iterations, it is crucial to detect undecodable blocks at the beginning of the decoding process. The proposed stopping criterion for undecodable blocks is based on the estimation of the variable node reliability (VNR) and this stopping criterion has to be switched off when VNR passes a threshold. Simulation results show that the proposed approach can effectively reduce the average number of iterations at low SNR region where most blocks are undecodable, meanwhile the performance loss at all SNR region is negligible.
Keywords-LDPC; Decoding; Early Stopping; CMMB
I. INTRODUCTION
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [1]-[2] are a class of powerful error correcting codes that can perform close to the Shannon limit. With long code-lengths, LDPC codes can even outperform Turbo codes but with relatively low decoding computational complexity. Due to the advantage of LDPC codes, such as lower complexity of decoding and lower error floor, their applications in reliable communications have received great interests and have become one of most attractive field in channel coding community. Presently in Chinese Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting standard (CMMB) [3], LDPC code is also used as Forward Error Correction Code combined with RS code.
The decoding of LDPC codes is an iterative process, in practical design, a maximum number of iterations is preset. At each iteration, for decodable blocks the LDPC decoder detects successful decoding by parity checking and stops the decoding. However, for undecodable blocks, it iterates until it reaches the preset maximum number of iterations. It happens that the decoding failure do occur even though a large number of decoding iterations are performed. Therefore, it is desirable to detect undecodable blocks early in the decoding process in order to avoid unnecessary iterations. In this paper, the proposed stopping criterion for undecodable blocks is based on the estimation of the variable node reliability (VNR) and this stopping criterion has to be switched off when VNR passes a threshold in order to avoid considerable performance loss at high SNR region. Simulation results show that the proposed approach can effectively reduce the average number of iterations at low SNR region and the performance loss at all SNR region is negligible.

The structure of this paper is organized as follows: In section II, the characteristics and algorithm of LDPC codes in CMMB are presented. The proposed early stopping criterion is given in section III. Simulation results and conclusion are provided in Section IV and Section V, respectively.
II. LDPC CODES IN CMMB STANDARD A. Characteristics of LDPC Codes in CMMB
LDPC codes are a set of linear block codes defined by a sparse M×N parity check matrix H, which has very low density of 1’s. M represents the number of parity checks, and N represents the number of bits in the code, called the block length [5]. In CMMB, the parity check matrix is a regular matrix. There are two different code rates (0.5 and 0.75). For the 0.5 rate parity check matrix (of dimensions 4608×9216), there are 6 “1” in each row and 3 “1” in each column. The H matrix can be divided into 256 sub-matrixes, which have 18 rows and 9216 columns. The next sub-matrix can be obtained by shifting right the previous sub-matrix 36 columns. The H matrix can also be divided into 256 sub-matrixes; each matrix has 4608 rows and 36 columns. The next sub-matrix can be obtained by shifting down the previous sub-matrix 18 rows.
Similarly, for the 0.75 rate parity check matrix (of dimensions 2304×9216), there are 12 “1” in each row and 3 “1” in each column. The H matrix can be divided into 9×9216 sub-matrix, and also can be divided into 2304×36 sub-matrix. However, due to the limited space, this paper just study rate-0.5 9216-bits LDPC code in CMMB standard.
Fig.1 shows location of “1” in H matrix for code rate 0.5.
Figure 1. Location of “1” in H matrix for code rate 0.5

978-1-A4u6t7h3or-i1ze1d84lic-e7n/1se2d/$u3s1e.l0im0it©ed2t0o1: Y2oInEsEeiEUniv. Downloaded on Jun1e42342,2026 at 09:32:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. LDPC Decoding Algorithm
The typical LDPC decoding algorithm is the Sum-Product (or belief propagation) algorithm [6], which can provide a powerful method for decoding LDPC codes. After variable nodes are initialized with the channel information, the decoding messages are iteratively computed by all the variable nodes and check nodes and exchanged through the edges between the neighbor nodes.
The Normalized Min-Sum decoding algorithm is similar to the Sum-Product algorithm, with an approximation of the check node process. It has some advantages in implementation over the Sum-Product algorithm (SPA), such as less computation complexity and no requirement of knowledge of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels.
In the Normalized Min-Sum decoding algorithm, the check-to-variable message Lrji are computed as (1)-(2).

∏ Lrji

α β α = (
i '∈N f ( j ) \{i}

i

'

j

)

min i'

i' j

(1)

αij = sign(Lqij ) βij = Lqij

(2)

where N f ( j) denotes the set of variable nodes that
participate in check j, and α is correction factor for
overestimation of the message. The variable-to-check message Lqij is computed as (3)-(4).

∑ Lqij = Lci +

Lrj 'i

(3)

j '∈N x (i )\{ j}

Lci = 2 yi / σ 2

(4)

where σ 2 is the noise variance of the channel and equation (4) is only true for AWGN channel. Where ci denotes the i-th bit of a codeword and yi denotes the corresponding received signal from the AWGN channel. Where Nx (i)
denotes the set of check nodes that participate in variable node i. The soft output of variable node i, which for early termination or at the end of decoding hard decisions are needed, is computed by (5).

∑ LQi = Lci +

Lrji

(5)

j∈N x (i )

To make a hard decision on LQi , choose whether a zero or one is most likely, equation (6) formalizes this rule.

ci

=

⎧1 ⎨⎩ 0

if LQi < 0 else

i = 0,1,..., N −1

(6)

Iterate until the algorithm converges by some metric such as all parity checks are satisfied or until a preset maximum number of iterations is reached.
III. STOPPING CRITERIA FOR LDPC CODES
The proposed stopping criterion for undecodable blocks is based on the estimation of the variable node reliability (VNR) [7]-[8] which is defined as

N

∑ VNR(k) =

LQi(k )

(7)

i =1

where LQi(k ) is the magnitude of the soft values of the i-th
variable node at the k-th iteration obtained in equation (5).
Fig.2 illustrates variation of the value of VNR in the decoding process. It can be seen that variation of the value of VNR behaves very much different for decodable and undecodable blocks. For undecodable blocks the value of VNR is almost constant during the whole decoding process, whereas for decodable blocks a rapid growth with the increase of iteration can be seen. Actually, for decodable blocks it is not always monotone increasing, that is, the value of VNR possibly keeps unchanged or decreases in a certain iteration interval, and received blocks are most likely decodable at high SNR region.

Figure 2. Variation of the value of VNR in the decoding process

Thus, at each iteration, the decoder decides the decoding failure based on the following decision rule:
If the VNR(k) does not change or decrease within two
successive decoding iterations, then stop the decoding process.
That is, VNRold ≥ VNRnew .But, if VNR(k) exceeds a threshold (VNRoff ), this stopping criterion has to be switched off and a decoder proceeds to the next iteration. VNRoff is
dependent on the code rate R of the LDPC code and on the
number of variable nodes. More precisely, The VNRoff can
be calculated by

VNRoff = MB × N

(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June12443,32026 at 09:32:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where N is the number of variable nodes, MB stands for “mean bound” defined as

MB

=

4 R

×

⎛ ⎜

⎝

Eb N
0

⎞ ⎟ ⎠WR

(9)

where R is the code rate of the LDPC code, and

⎛ ⎜ ⎝

Eb N0

⎞ ⎟ ⎠WR

is

a SNR value around the waterfall region (WR) in a bit-error

rate (BER) curve.

Fig.3 illustrates flowchart of the proposed stopping criterion.

This paper is the first paper to introduce an early stopping criterion for LDPC codes decoding based on CMMB standard, so we could not find any reference to compare our criterion with. For example, criterions in [7] are targeted for the code rates R=0.8 and R=0.5 with a codeword length of 2000 bits and 3200 bits respectively, so it is not reasonable to compare early stopping criterions with the proposed one because they are based on a totally different H matrix.

LQi(k )

VNRnew

VNRnew < VNRoff VNRnew ≤ VNRold

VNRold iteration

VNRnew iteration +1

Figure 3. Flowchart of the proposed stopping criterion
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
We have simulated the proposed stopping criterion on rate-0.5 9216-bits LDPC code over AWGN channel. α = 0.8 Normalized MSA algorithm is used for decoding, and the maximum number of iterations is set to 20. The performance of the stopping criterion is evaluated in terms of bit-error rate (BER) and average number of iterations. And the result is depicted in Fig.4.
Simulation results show that the proposed stopping criterion can significantly reduce the average number of decoding iterations as well as decrease decoding latency at low SNR region (e.g. the average number of decoding with early stopping criterion is 7 times when SNR=0.5dB), and this stopping criterion has to be disenabled when the VNR passes
the VNRoff to avoid performance loss and save computation
overhead. The performance loss is very small at all SNR regions.

Figure 4. BER performance and average number of iterations
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an early stopping criterion for low density parity check (LDPC) codes decoding based on CMMB standard has been proposed. Simulation results have demonstrated that the proposed stopping criterion can significantly reduce the average number of decoding iterations at low SNR region, meanwhile the performance loss at all SNR region is negligible.
REFERENCES
[1] R.G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 1962, pp. 21-28.
[2] Moura J.M.F., Jin Lu, and Haotian Zhang, “Structured low-density parity-check codes,” in IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, Volume 21, Jan 2004, pp. 42-55.
[3] Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting (P. R. China) Part 1:Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Broadcasting Channel.
[4] So-Jin Lee, Joo-Yul Park, and Ki-Seok Chung, “Memory Efficient Multi-Rate Regular LDPC Decoder for CMMB,” in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 55, No.4, Nov 2009, pp. 1866-1874.
[5] Taiqiu Tan, Yubai Li, and Chang Wu, “Low-complexity high-performance LDPC decoder for CMMB,” in 2nd International Conference on Information Science and Engineering, (ICISE), Dec 2010, pp. 3819-3822.
[6] Jin Sha, Chuan Zhang, Li Li, and Gao Minglun, “An FPGA implementation of LDPC simulation platform,” in ISECS International Colloquium on Computing, Communication, Control, and Management, (ISECS), Aug 2009, pp. 58-61.
[7] F. Kienle and N. Wehn, “Low complexity stopping criterion for LDPC code decoders,” in IEEE 61st Vehicular Technology Conference, vol. 1, June 2005, pp. 606 – 609.
[8] Donghyuk Shin, Kyoungwoo Heo, Sangbong Oh and jeongseok Ha, “A Stopping Criterion for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, in IEEE 65th Vehicular Technology Conference, VTC2007-Spring , vol. 1, June 2007, pp. 1529 – 1533.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June12443,42026 at 09:32:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

