2012 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems

PROPAGATION OF LLR SATURATION AND QUANTIZATION ERROR IN LDPC MIN-SUM ITERATIVE DECODING
N. Kanistras, I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras∗
University of Patras Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
26500 Patras, Greece

ABSTRACT
In this paper we investigate the propagation in the decoding procedure of the error due to the finite-word-length representation of the LLRs, for the case of LDPC codes. A model is developed that quantifies the impact of the quantization error of the LLRs on the decoding performance, in case of iterative decoding using the Min-Sum algorithm. An older model, also developed by the authors, exploits the new one in order to estimate the performance of various LLR quantization schemes. Proposed model estimation is compared with experimental BER results, in order to be validated.
Index Terms— LDPC decoding, finite wordlength effects, LLR quantization, soft-decoding.
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, originally invented by Gallager in 1960s [1] and rediscovered in late 1990s by MacKay and Neal [2], show excellent error correction performance, very close to the Shannon limit [3]. Providing performance comparable to turbo codes, yet with decoding of lower complexity and high degree of parallelism, LDPC codes have been considered for many industrial standards of next generation communication systems as Digital Video Broadcast (DVB) DVB-S2, IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T) and IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX).
LDPC codes can be decoded using the message passing algorithm, which iteratively exchanges soft information between two sets of nodes, namely variable and check nodes. The quantization scheme of the soft information strongly influences the performance of an LDPC decoder. While simulations are normally done with floating point computation, practical implementations (ASIC or FPGA) use fixed-point representation. The finite word length of the soft information directly impacts the size of memory to store the intrinsic and extrinsic messages and the overall hardware area. Consequently it affects the complexity of computation logic, routing complexity as well as the decoding performance. Moreover, the finite-word-length representation of the a priori information that the channel provides to the decoder, namely LLRs, has similar effects. In order to determine the optimum word lengths required to represent data, tedious and time consuming simulations are required. Aiming to the reduction of the corresponding design time, analytical
∗This research has been co-financed by the European Union (European Social Fund - ESF) and Greek national funds through the Operational Program ”Education and Lifelong Learning” of the National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) - Research Funding Program: Heracleitus II. Investing in knowledge society through the European Social Fund.

models that relate word lengths to LDPC decoding performance are studied.
The impact of data quantization both at the waterfall region as well as at the error floor has been studied by several authors. Zhang et al. have shown that quantization strongly impacts the decoding performance on the error-floor region [4]. Yazdani and Ardakani assume that the power of the additive noise is known and find the optimum linear approximation of LLRs in the sense of maximum achievable transmission rate on a fading channel [5]. Kim et al. investigate in [6] the impact of scaling on the dynamic range of the LLR values, taking into considering the finite precision for hardware implementation. An adaptive quantization approach to effectively select suitable input LLR values to the decoder, is also proposed in [6]. Zhang et al. divide the decoder into two quantization domains and reduce the saturation level of extrinsic messages for the case of sum-product decoding algorithm, in order to narrow the loss due to non-convergent errors [4]. The result is a substantial improvement of the error floor performance.
In this paper we investigate the mechanisms by means of which the LLRs quantization error is propagated in Min-Sum iterative decoding procedure. Since quantization error comprises two kinds of error, namely saturation and roundoff, the impact of each kind on decoding performance is quantified, with respect to the quantization scheme and the noise level of an additive white Gaussian channel.
A corresponding theoretical model is developed which exploits a model developed by the authors in the past [7]. The derived model gives the propagated, in the output of the Min-Sum decoder, power of the error, due to the LLRs quantization, as a function of the finite-word-length representation scheme of the LLRs and the AWGN channel noise level. The objective of the proposed model is to identify among several LLRs representation schemes, the one that reduces the degradation on decoding performance due to the quantization error, without requiring time-consuming simulation. The results provided by the model are exploited to explain the behavior of experimental bit-error rate vs. Eb/N0 plots, obtained via FPGAbased prototyping. The use of the particular hardware tool allows the study to extend to BER values below 10−9, where flattening effects manifest themselves.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 the propagation of the error, due to the LLRs quantization, in decoding procedure is investigated and a corresponding model is developed. In Section 3 the developed model is exploited to estimate the decoding performance degradation due to LLRs quantization for various quantization schemes. In Section 4 experimental results validate the proposed model, while Section 5 concludes the paper.

978-0-7695-4856-2/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE

276

DOI 10.1109/SiPS.2012.22

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:24:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Saturation

Roundof f

Saturation

D
Ld

Lu

x

Fig. 1: Graphical representation of the quantized values dynamic range.

2. IMPACT OF SATURATION AND ROUNDOFF ERROR ON MIN-SUM LDPC DECODER
When a variable x is quantized, either saturation of roundoff error occurs. In order to study the impact of the quantization error on Min-Sum decoding, the use of two’s-complement representation is assumed.

2.1. Effect of Two’s-Complement Representation

Assuming a two’s-complement representation, that employs i integer and f fractional bits, the dynamic range of the quantized values ranges from −2i−1 up to 2i−1 − 2−f with resolution 2−f . Let Ld and Lu denote the lower and the upper limit respectively of the dynamic region of the represented values, namely

Ld = −2i−1

Lu = 2i−1 − 2−f .

(1)

Saturation occurs when the initial value x lies outside the dynamic range of representable values. Assuming a random variable x, that follows a distribution f (x), the probability Psat of the event that x is saturated, given the limits Ld and Lu, is

Psat =

Ld

∞

fx(x)dx + fx(x)dx

−∞

Lu

Lu

= 1−

fx(x)dx .

(2)

Ld

In case that variable x is not saturated, which means it lies within the dynamic region of representable values, it is subject to the so called Roundoff error. The event that the variable x is subject to Roundoff error is complementary to the event of x being saturated. Consequently, the probability Prnd of Roundoff error may be expressed as a function of the saturation probability,

Lu

Prnd = 1 − Psat =

fx(x)dx .

(3)

Ld

Fig. 1 depicts graphically the regions where saturation and roundoff error occur.

2.2. Min-Sum Decoding Algorithm
A popular choice among message-passing decoding algorithms is the Min-Sum (MS) algorithm [8]. Its popularity is due to its simplicity and its consequent implementation effectiveness. The algorithm performs a number of two-phase iterations. The procedure is defined on a bipartite graph, known as Tanner graph [9], with two sets of nodes, called the check nodes and the variable nodes. During the first phase, called Variable Node Update, messages Qjk are computed and sent from Variable Nodes to appropriate Check Nodes,

where j is the sender Variable Node and k is the recipient Check Node. Check Node Update is the name of the second phase, where a corresponding procedure for Check-to-Variable nodes messages Rkj takes place.
The computation of Qvc follows

Qjk =

Rlj + λj

(4)

l∈Sj \k

λj = log

p (yj = 0) p (yj = 1)

,

(5)

where {Sj\k} is the set of Check Nodes connected with the Variable Node j, on the code Tanner graph, apart from the Check Node k. Rlj is the message that Variable Node j receives from Check Node k and λj is the a priori information that the value of the received symbol yj gives for the correspondent to Variable Node j bit. λj is constant
for each Variable Node during algorithm execution.

Subsequently the second phase of an iteration computes the

Check-to-Variable Nodes messages. This phase is called Check Node Update. Message Rkj is computed, for the case of Min-Sum algorithm, as

Rkj =

sign (Qnk) · min (|Qnk|) .

(6)

n∈Sk \j

n∈Sk \j

where {Sk\j} is the set of Variable Nodes connected with the Check Node k apart from the Variable Node j, Qnk is the message that the Check Node k receives from Variable Node n, sign(x) returns +1, when x ≥ 0, and −1, when x < 0.

Before the first iteration, all Check-to-Variable Nodes messages

are initialized to zero. At the end of each iteration a hard decision is taken for each variable node. In particular, a quantity Qj is computed,

Qj =

Rlj + λj

(7)

l∈Sj

The sign of Qj indicates the algorithm estimation/decision for the corresponding bit.

In case that the word cˆ, composed by the estimations of the al-

gorithm for all Variable Nodes, is a codeword, the algorithm termi-

nates. Otherwise it continues until a fixed pre-defined number of

iterations is reached.

The processing of individual nodes within one phase is indepen-

dent and can thus be parallelized.

2.3. LLR Quantization Error Propagation in Min-Sum Decoding
The way by which the error, introduced due to the LLR finite-wordlength representation, propagates during decoding should be studied in order to estimate the impact of this error on decoding performance. Assuming that a percentage Psat · 100% of the LLRs are saturated, while the remainder Prnd · 100% of them are subject to Roundoff error, in the following we determine the kind (saturation or roundoff) of the propagated error.
Error propagation depends directly on the decoding procedure used. Fig. 2 depicts a check node ck into which six variable nodes are connected. Taking into account (6), it is concluded that only one of the inserted to check node messages Qjk is selected as the output of the node. In particular, due to the existence of min function, the incoming message with the least absolute value is selected. Since saturation occurs when the message value m lies out of the repre-

277 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:24:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

λ1

λ2

v1

v2

Q1k

λ3

λ4

λ5

λ6

v3

v4

v5

v6

Q4k

ck

Rkx Fig. 2: A six degree check node.

sented dynamic range, as depicted in Fig. 1, it holds that the absolute

value of a saturated message |mˆ sat| is greater or equal to the corre-

sponding value of a message |mˆ rnd| that is subjected to Roundoff

error,

|mˆ sat| ≥ |mˆ rnd|.

(8)

Symbol pˆ indicates the quantized quantity p. Assuming that pm is the message with the least absolute value
among all of the messages incoming to a check node, then this one is the output of the min function and vice versa,

|pm| ≤ |pn| , ∀n ∈ N ⇔ min (|pn|) = |pm| .

(9)

n∈N

In case that pm is saturated, then all of the remainder messages that come into the check node are saturated. This holds because, if at least one of the messages, pt for example (t ∈ N \m), that income to a check node is subjected to Roundoff error, then according to (8) it would hold that,
|pˆt| ≤ |pˆm|,
which is inappropriate due to the assumption (9). Consequently, we conclude that if the output of a check node
is a saturated message, then all of the incoming to this check node messages have been subjected to saturation error. The probability P (Rkj is saturated) of such an event is given by

P (Rkj is saturated) =

(P (Qnk is saturated))

n∈Sk \j

dk −1

=

(Psat) = Ps(adtk−1) ,

n=1

(10)

where dk is the degree of check node ck, namely the number of variable nodes that participate into ck, while Psat is the probability of the event that a Variable-to-Check Nodes message is saturated. Psat is given by (2) assuming that fx(x) is the distribution of the Variable-to-Check Nodes messages.
In case of regular LDPC codes, namely codes whose variable and check nodes degrees are equal for all variable and check nodes respectively, (10) gives the probability PchkSat of the event that the output of any of the decoder check nodes is saturated. However, in case of irregular codes, the computation of this probability is slightly more complex, since the degree varies among the check nodes. In

such a case, the so-called check node-degree distribution polyno-

mial,

dc

ρ (x) = ρdxd−1 ,

(11)

d=1

expresses the fraction ρd of all variable nodes that participate into degree-d check nodes, while dc denotes the maximum check node

degree. The probability of the event that the output of anyone of the

decoder check nodes is saturated is then given by,

dc

PchkSat =

(ρd · P (Rkj is saturated))

d=1

dc

=

ρd · Ps(adt−1) .

d=1

(12)

According to the former analysis that drove to the estimation of the probability P (Rkj is saturated) (10), if the output of a check node is not saturated, then it is subjected to roundoff noise. In other words, the event that the output of a check node is subjected to roundoff noise is complement of the event that the output is saturated and therefore it holds that

PchkRnd = 1 − PchkSat ,

(13)

where PchkRnd is the probability of the first event. The above analysis is applicable to the second phase of the de-
coding iteration, namely Check Node Update. The first phase, described by (4), comprises the summation of incoming messages to variable node, as well as the corresponding channel a priori information (LLR). Since a simple summation takes place in this phase, the impact of the propagation of the saturation error is proportional to the total number of saturated messages that are summed. Similarly for the case of roundoff error.
In particular, the total number Nd of messages that come from degree-d check nodes is given by the product

Nd = ρd · d · N .

(14)

The factor ρd has already been declared as the fraction of variable nodes that participate into degree-d check nodes, which is identical to the fraction of edges that are connected to degree-d check nodes, while N is the total number of edges in the Tanner graph of the code. The probability, that a message that comes from a degree-d check node is saturated, is given by (10), assuming dk = d. The total probability PvarSat, regarding all check nodes, is given by the weighted summation of the corresponding probabilities for all of the
check node degrees, namely

dc

PvarSat =

ρd · d · Ps(adt−1) .

d=1

(15)

The existence of the a priori information provided by the channel via the LLR, has been omitted until now. According to (4), the total number of Check-to-Variable node messages that are summed to all variable nodes is N − V , since N is the total number of incoming to variable nodes messages and one message per variable node is omitted. Omitted messages are V in total. The total number of added LLRs to variable nodes is V , since one LLR per node is added. Consequently, the fraction of the LLR terms in all terms of the Variable Nodes Update phase is

LF = V /N .

(16)

278 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:24:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In order to take LLRs into account on PvarSat calculation, the weighted summation of probabilities that takes into consideration the contribution of the a priori information that the channel provides should be considered. This summation derives from (15) and (16) as follows,

dc

PvarSat = LF · Psat + (1 − LF ) ·

ρd · d · Ps(adt−1)

d=1

(17)

and gives the probability PvarSat of the event that a message Qjk

sent from variable to a check node is saturated. Since the event that

such a message is subjected to Roundoff error is complement to the

event that it is saturated, the probability PvarRnd of the first event is

given by

PvarRnd = 1 − PvarSat .

(18)

Eqs. (16) and (18) combined with (2) express the propagation of Saturation and Roundoff error through Min-Sum iterative decoding procedure and can be exploited to draw useful conclusions about the finite-word-length representation of the LLRs, as it is shown in the next Section.

2.4. Propagation of the Quantization Error through Decoding Iterations

Analysis so far has not taken into consideration the iterative nature of the Min-Sum decoding algorithm. Psat in (17) has already been declared as the probability of the event that a Variable-to-Check Nodes message is saturated at the beginning of a decoding iteration. PvarSat is the probability of the corresponding event at the end of the iteration, which means that this relationship may be repetitively used in order to determine the probability of this event through the executed decoding iterations. Moreover, in order to derive the probability of the event that the decision message of the decoder about a variable node is saturated, the fraction LF should be modified, because all of the incoming to each variable node messages participate to the summation of (7). In this case, the needed fraction is

LF = V /(N + V ) .

(19)

An algorithmic description of the above described procedure is given as Algorithm 1.
The probability PrndDec of the complementary event, that a variable node decidion message is subjected to Roundoff error after D decoding iterations, is

PrndDec = 1 − PsatDec .

(22)

It should be mentioned here that the above analysis assumes that exchanged messages are independent. This is not true due to the existence of cycles on the code Tanner graph, however without this assumption the whole analysis becomes intractable.

3. EXPLOITATION OF ROUNDOFF AND SATURATION IMPACT TO DETERMINE EFFICIENT LLR REPRESENTATION SCHEME
In a previous study by the authors [7], the power of the Saturation and Roundoff error due to the finite-word-length representation of the LLRs, have been accurately determined through analytical expressions, in case of AWGN transmission channel. In that work, the error power was exploited on the one hand to determine the impact of the finite-word-length representation of the LLRs on decoding. On

Algorithm 1 Propagation of the saturation probability

1: Define the saturation probability of LLR Psat, according to (2). 2: Set Psat(1) = Psat, the probability of the event that a

Variable-to-Check node message is saturated at the beginning

of the first decoding iteration.

3:

Set LF

=

V N

.

4: for i = 1 : (D − 1) do

5: Psat(i + 1): probability of the event that a Variable-to-Check node message is saturated at the beginning of the i-th decod-

ing iteration,

dc
Psat(i + 1) = (1 − LF ) · ρd · d · Ps(adt−1)(i)
d=1
+LF · Psat(i) . (20)

6: end for

7:

Set LF

=

V N +V

.

8: PsatDec(D): probability of the event that a variable node deci-

sion message (given by (7)) is saturated after D decoding itera-

tions,

dc

PsatDec(D) = (1 − LF ) ·

ρd · d · Ps(adt−1)(D)

d=1

+LF · Psat(D) . (21)

the other hand, this impact was used to determine the most effective LLR representation scheme in terms of decoding performance, by considering that, the more the power of the error due to LLRs quantization is, the more information from the channel is lost, resulting in decoding performance degradation. In that work the quantitative contribution of the Saturation and Roundoff error to the decoding performance degradation was experimentally determined, since the propagation of both types of error through the decoding procedure had not been studied yet.
Conclusions drawn through the study of the finite-word-length representation error are summarized by (21) and (22). Assuming that PrndErr and PsatErr are respectively the Roundoff and the Saturation error power determined at the previous work, a measure of the impact IF RE that these two types of error may have to the decoding performance of Min-Sum algorithm, is given by

IF RE = PrndDec · PrndErr + PsatDec · PsatErr ,

which can be reduced to

IF RE = (1 − PsatDec) · PrndErr + PsatDec · PsatErr = PrndErr + PsatDec · (PsatErr − PrndErr) (23)

because of (22).
It must be mentioned that since we assume that the transmission channel is AWGN, the LLRs follow a Gaussian mixture distribution, which is described by

exp fx(x) =

− (x+

2 σn2

)2

2

2 σn

2

+ exp

√ 2 2π

2 σn

− (x−

2 σn2

)2

2

2 σn

2

,

(24)

279 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:24:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Error Impact BER

107 106 105 104 103 102 101 100 10−1 10−2
−10

(4, 2) (5, 1) (6, 0) (7, −1)

−5

0

5

10

Eb/N0

(a) Proposed Model

100

(4, 2)

10−2

(5, 1) (6, 0)

(7, −1)

10−4

10−6

10−8

10−10

15

20

10−12

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

Eb/N0

(b) Simulations Results for decoding performance

Fig. 3: Code A (1512, 2016).

where σn stands for the standard deviation of the noise induced by the channel. It has been also assumed that BSPK modulation is used and that ±1 are the transmitted symbols.

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND PROPOSED MODEL VALIDATION

The model expressed by (23) has been applied in the study of two random codes with the objective to determine the impact of the representation and investigate the agreement with simulation results. The first one of the codes, namely code A, is an irregular (1512, 2016) LDPC code, whose variable-node degree distribution polynomial is

μA (x) = 0.2083x + 0.0417x2 + 0.75x3 .

(25)

The second code, code B, is an also irregular (1008, 2016) LDPC code, while its variable-node degree distribution polynomial is given by
μB (x) = 0.111x + 0.389x2 + 0.0417x3 + 0.0972x4 +0.1389x5 + 0.1389x6 + 0.0556x7 +0.0139x8 + 0.0139x9 . (26)

For both codes, the model described by (23) has been applied, while simulations have been carried out via FPGA-prototyping. The overall system consists of an LDPC-codec and an Additive White Gaussian Noise Channel, designed and implemented using Virtex5XC5VFX70T FPGA. The system has been designed in VHDL and mapped into FPGA using the Xilinx design flow. The implemented decoder uses the Min-Sum layered decoding algorithm [10], and executes a maximum number of ten decoding iterations.
In case of code A, the results that the application of the model described by (23) forecasts are depicted in Fig. 3a for four LLRs representation schemes, namely (i, f ) = {(4, 2), (5, 1), (6, 0), (7, −1)}, while Fig. 3b depicts the decoding performance in case of the same quantization schemes. It is shown that the proposed model predicts the superiority of the (5, 1) quantization scheme within the simu-

lated region of the noise levels, as well as the improvement of (6, 0) scheme for Eb/N0 more than 5dBs. According to the proposed model the quantization scheme (7, −1) that uses only six integral bits, omitting the least significant one (power of zero), is expected to outperform the other schemes when Eb/N0 > 8dBs. Simulation results cannot validate this state, since the BER is too low for this code on such noise levels.
The model data regarding code B, are reported in Fig. 4. More quantization schemes have been tested in this case, namely (i, f ) = {(2, 4), (3, 3), (4, 2), (5, 1), (6, 0)}. Simulation results validate in general the proposed model.
It should be mentioned here that the internally exchanged messages of the decoder are represented with 18 bits, in case of the implemented architecture that performs these simulations.
5. CONCLUSIONS
The finite-word-length representation of LLRs has a non-negligible impact to the decoding performance of LDPC codes, by means of two types of error, namely saturation and roundoff error. Although these two types of error have already been quantitatively determined at the input of the decoder, by the authors in a previous work, there was a lack of propagation model, that would link the determined error to the decoding performance degradation. In this work, the mechanism, by means of which the error is propagated in the decoding procedure, is analyzed and a corresponding theoretical model for this mechanism is developed. The proposed model is combined with previous results to obtain a model able to identify among several LLRs representation schemes, the one that reduces the degradation on decoding performance due to quantization error, without requiring time-consuming simulation.
Experimental results, provided by an FPGA-based simulations system, confirm the validity of the proposed model.
6. REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21 –28, Jan.

280 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:24:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Error Impact
BER

107 106 105 104 103 102 101 100 10−1 10−2 10−3
−10

(2, 4) (3, 3) (4, 2) (5, 1) (6, 0)

−5

0

5

10

Eb/N0

(a) Proposed Model

100

(2, 4)

(3, 3)

10−2

(4, 2)

(5, 1)

(6, 0)

10−4

10−6

10−8

10−10

15

20

10−12

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

Eb/N0

(b) Simulations Results for decoding performance

Fig. 4: Code B (1008, 2016).

1962.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457 –458, Mar. 1997.
[3] Sae-Young Chung, Jr. Forney, G.D., T.J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[4] Zhengya Zhang, L. Dolecek, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Quantization effects in Low-Density ParityCheck decoders,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications ICC, June 2007, pp. 6231–6237.
[5] Raman Yazdani and Masoud Ardakani, “Optimum linear LLR calculation for iterative decoding on fading channels,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), 2007, June 2007, pp. 61 –65.
[6] S. Kim, G.E. Sobelman, and H. Lee, “Adaptive quantization in min-sum based irregular LDPC decoder,” in IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2008, May 2008, pp. 536 –539.
[7] N. Kanistras, I. Tsatsaragkos, I. Paraskevakos, A. Mahdi, and V. Paliouras, “Impact of LLR saturation and quantization on LDPC min-sum decoders,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SIPS), 2010, Oct. 2010, pp. 410 –415.
[8] Niclas Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs, Ph.D. thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linko¨ping University, Sweden, Apr. 1996.
[9] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533 – 547, Sept. 1981.
[10] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A flexible layered LDPC decoder,” in 8th International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), 2011, Nov. 2011, pp. 36 –40.

281 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:24:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

