6616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

Density Evolution Analysis of Node-Based Verification-Based Algorithms in Compressed Sensing
Yaser Eftekhari, Student Member, IEEE, Anoosheh Heidarzadeh, Student Member, IEEE, Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE, and Ioannis Lambadaris

Abstract—In this paper, we present a new approach for the anal-

ysis of iterative node-based verification-based (NB-VB) recovery

algorithms in the context of compressed sensing. These algorithms

are particularly interesting due to their low complexity (linear

in the signal dimension ). The asymptotic analysis predicts the

fraction of unverified signal elements at each iteration in the

asymptotic regime where

. The analysis is similar in na-

ture to the well-known density evolution technique commonly used

to analyze iterative decoding algorithms. To perform the analysis, a

message-passing interpretation of NB-VB algorithms is provided.

This interpretation lacks the extrinsic nature of standard mes-

sage-passing algorithms to which density evolution is usually ap-

plied. This requires a number of nontrivial modifications in the anal-

ysis. The analysis tracks the average performance of the recovery

algorithms over the ensembles of input signals and sensing matrices

as a function of . Concentration results are devised to demonstrate

that the performance of the recovery algorithms applied to any

choice of the input signal over any realization of the sensing matrix

follows the deterministic results of the analysis closely. Simulation

results are also provided which demonstrate that the proposed

asymptotic analysis matches the performance of recovery algo-

rithms for large but finite values of . Compared to the existing

technique for the analysis of NB-VB algorithms, which is based on

numerically solving a large system of coupled differential equations,

the proposed method is more accurate and simpler to implement.

Index Terms—Asymptotic analysis, channel coding, compressed sensing, density evolution, iterative decoding algorithms, iterative recovery algorithms, low-complexity compressed sensing, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing algorithms, sparse graphs, sparse sensing matrix, success threshold, verification-based recovery algorithms.

C I. INTRODUCTION

OMPRESSED sensing was introduced with the idea to

represent a signal

with nonzero elements with

measurements

, where

, and yet to be

able to recover back the original signal [1], [2]. In the mea-

suring process, also referred to as encoding, signal elements are

mapped to measurements through a linear transformation repre-

sented by the matrix multiplication

, where the matrix

is referred to as the sensing matrix. This linear map-

ping can also be characterized by a bipartite graph [3], referred

to as the sensing graph.

Manuscript received April 01, 2011; revised March 17, 2012; accepted June 16, 2012. Date of publication July 06, 2012; date of current version September 11, 2012. This paper was presented in part at the 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: eft-yas@sce.carleton.ca; anoosheh@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca; ioannis@sce. carleton.ca).
Communicated by D. Guo, Associate Editor for Shannon Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2206368

In the recovery process, also referred to as decoding, based on the knowledge of the measurements and the sensing matrix, we estimate the original signal. The decoding process is successful if is estimated correctly. Three performance measures

namely, density ratio

, compression ratio

, and

oversampling ratio

are used in order to measure and

compare the performance of the recovery algorithms in the con-

text of compressed sensing.1

The sensing matrix in compressed sensing can be either dense

or sparse. A sensing matrix is considered dense if it has few, or

none, zero entries. Sparse matrices, on the other hand, have few

nonzero entries in each row and column. One major difference

between these two types of matrices is the encoding complexity

associated with each class. For sparse matrices, the number of

operations needed to calculate the measurements is consider-

ably lower than the one needed for dense matrices.

Decoding algorithms can be classified based on the class of

sensing matrix they use. The decoding algorithms in each class

have certain properties in common. (For a comprehensive study

on the topic, we refer the interested readers to [7].) Decoding

algorithms associated with dense matrices have, generally, high

complexity (between

and

) compared to the lower

complexity of algorithms utilizing sparse matrices (between

and

). To have a better feeling about the complexity

and running time of these two classes of algorithms, we have

included in Fig. 7 of Section VII the comparison between two

standard recovery algorithms for dense matrices ( minimiza-

tion and weighted minimization) and one algorithm (SBB)

for sparse matrices. As can be seen, the decoding algorithm

for sparse matrices is faster by about two orders of magnitude.

Decoding algorithms for dense matrices are mostly based on

linear or convex programming [1], [2], [8], [9]. The reason is

that random dense matrices satisfy restricted isometry property

(RIP) with overwhelming probability [10], [11]. The RIP was

introduced by Candès and Tao [12] as the main restriction

on the sensing matrix so that the recovery based on linear

programming will be able to successfully recover the signal.

Sparse matrices, on the other hand, do not satisfy RIP unless

1For successful decoding clearly we need

. It is desirable to have

this parameter as small as possible. Indeed, in [4], the authors proved that for

sparse signals and in noiseless scenarios

is achievable in the asymptotic

case

. This means that the highest density ratio that an algorithm can

possibly handle is

. In [5], the authors have shown that if the sensing

matrix consists of i.i.d. Gaussian elements, then a decoder based on the norm

can recover the original signal with

measurements; i.e.,

.

To find the solution based on the recovery, however, one has to perform an

exhaustive search, which is computationally too complex [6].

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6617

[13].2 In fact, many of the decoders based on

sparse sensing matrices are iterative [3], [14]–[26]. Although

more computationally complex, decoding algorithms for dense

matrices tend to recover signals with larger number of nonzero

elements (higher density ratio) compared to decoders for

sparse matrices. Nevertheless, the high complexity of decoding

algorithms on dense matrices hinders their application to

high-dimensional signal recovery (signals with large ).

Focusing on recovery algorithms based on sparse matrices

(or sparse graphs), we can further divide them into two major

groups. In one group, we have algorithms that use group testing

and similar techniques from estimation theory [14]–[17]. These

are referred to as combinatorial algorithms. In the other group,

recovery algorithms work with the bipartite graph associated

with the sensing matrix by passing messages over the edges

of the graph [3], [18]–[28]. These are referred to as mes-

sage-passing algorithms. Combinatorial algorithms, generally,

assume that the decoder knows the parameter [14]–[17].

These algorithms, have two main steps. In the first step, the

algorithm outputs an estimate which has more nonzero values

than the original signal. In the next step, knowing the param-

eter , the estimate is pruned so that it has the same number

of nonzero elements as the original signal (i.e., nonzero

elements). Combinatorial algorithms are, in general, more

computationally complex than message-passing algorithms.

For example, the algorithm introduced in [14] has complexity

, which translates to

in

the regime where scales linearly with . Message-passing

algorithms, on the other hand, have computational complexity

.

In this study, we are interested in low-complexity recovery

algorithms that exploit the sparsity of the sensing matrix.

In particular, we are interested in message-passing recovery

algorithms. In [27] and [28], the authors proposed and analyzed

a belief propagation (BP) algorithm to recover the nonzero

elements of the signal for the scenario where the location of

such elements is known in the asymptotic regime. It was shown

in [29] that if each signal element contributes to infinitely

many measurements (subject to certain criteria), then the BP

algorithm is asymptotically optimal in the case of sparse noisy

measurements. In [24], the authors proposed a simple mes-

sage-passing algorithm to reconstruct nonnegative signals. This

algorithm assumes lower and upper bounds for the values of the

signal elements. It then shrinks the difference between the two

bounds through iterations. An analysis for the same algorithm

that yields uniform guarantee on signal reconstruction was

then provided in [19]. Another approach in message-passing

algorithms is to assume a prior distribution for the values

of the signal elements and try to maximize the a posteriori

distribution of the values of the elements based on the observed

measurements. In [26], the authors assumed Gaussian mixture

priors. The main problem associated with this approach is

that the length of the messages passed over the edges of the

2The authors in [7] extended the definition of RIP and showed that sparse matrices satisfy a generalized RIP constraint. The generalized RIP suffices for the linear programming decoders to succeed in recovering sparse signals. However, the resulting bound on the reconstruction error is weaker compared to the case where the sensing matrix satisfies the original RIP condition.

graph grows exponentially fast with the number of iterations.

In another work [25], the authors assumed Jeffreys’ priors [30]

and aimed at recovering the nonzero elements of the original

signal using message-passing algorithms. Then, they applied

well-known least-squares algorithms, such as LSQR [31], to

estimate the value of the nonzero signal elements. Moreover, in

[25], it was assumed that the parameter is known. Algorithms

discussed so far are either restrictive, in the sense that they as-

sume some knowledge about the set of nonzero elements of the

signal at the decoder, or have a high computational complexity

that makes them impractical in applications with large .

In this paper, we are interested in a subclass of message-

passing algorithms called verification-based (VB) algorithms.

An instance of VB algorithms was first introduced for com-

pressed sensing in [18]. Later, Zhang and Pfister [20], [21] ob-

served that this algorithm is essentially identical to the earlier

idea of verification decoding from [32]. This observation al-

lowed a rigorous analysis of the VB reconstruction for com-

pressed sensing via density evolution. The class of VB algo-

rithms has certain properties that make it perhaps one of the

most interesting classes of recovery algorithms in compressed

sensing. The VB algorithms recover signal elements in itera-

tions. When an element is verified, its value is kept unchanged

in future iterations. The algorithms in this class have decoding

complexity

, which makes them suitable for applications

involving recovery of signals with large . Moreover, these al-

gorithms operate on sparse sensing graphs, which translates to

less computations in the encoding process. Another main ad-

vantage of VB algorithms is that they are not sensitive to the

distribution of nonzero elements of the sensing matrix as well

as the distribution of nonzero elements of the signal, if cer-

tain conditions are satisfied. We will elaborate on this topic fur-

ther in Section III. These properties make the VB algorithms

a suitable choice for low-complexity recovery of sparse sig-

nals. The VB algorithms are, however, sensitive to the presence

of noise in the measured data. One can always argue that: 1)

the noise-free analysis of recovery algorithms could serve as an

upper bound for the performance of the noisy versions, and 2)

noiseless compressed sensing has applications in computer net-

works, as shown in [24] and [33]. Nevertheless, we will com-

ment on using standard thresholding techniques to deal with

noisy measurements in Section VI. An in-depth analysis of the

approach, however, is beyond the scope of this paper.

Another interesting feature of VB algorithms is that their per-

formance can be analyzed in the asymptotic case

.

Assume a probabilistic input model, in which a signal element

is nonzero (and takes a value from a certain distribution) with

probability and is zero with probability

. In the sequel,

we refer to parameter as the density factor. Furthermore, let

denote the probability that a signal element is nonzero and

unverified before iteration over the ensemble of all sensing

graphs and inputs of interest. So,

. If

,

then the algorithm is called successful for the initial density

factor .3 On the other hand, if there exists

, such that

3It is easy to prove that the probability of a zero-valued signal element being

unverified at iteration is upper bounded by

. Hence, when tends

to zero, this probability also tends to zero.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

, then the algorithm is said to fail for the ini-

tial density factor . Using the combinatorial arguments in [34]

and [35], one can see that the algorithm completes the recovery

once the probability

.

Authors in [20], [22], [23], and [32] have shown that for each

VB recovery algorithm in the asymptotic regime as

and

, a limiting value exists for , before which the recovery

algorithm is successful and beyond which it is not. We refer to

this limit as the success threshold. The success threshold serves

as an asymptotic measure of performance for VB algorithms.

It can also be used to estimate the performance of these algo-

rithms for finite but large values of . To this end, researchers

have analyzed VB algorithms in the asymptotic regime

in order to find the success threshold associated

with each VB algorithm. There are two categories of VB al-

gorithms: node-based (NB) and message-based (MB) [23]. The

two categories yield different success thresholds and are ana-

lyzed using different techniques. Algorithms considered in [20]

and [32] are of MB type, while the authors in [23] considered the

NB-type recovery algorithms. In general, NB algorithms have

higher success thresholds and are harder to analyze. We elab-

orate on the differences between the two categories and their

corresponding analytical tools in Section II-B. The focus of this

study is on the analysis of NB algorithms.

The analysis of NB-VB algorithms discussed in [23] results

in a system of coupled differential equations. Due to the lack of

closed-form solution for the resulting differential equations, the

authors used numerical methods to approximate the asymptotic

results. Since the analysis is only valid for

, one has to

choose very large for the numerical approximation. This trans-

lates to long running time and high computational complexity.

The other challenge is that numerical errors can affect the ac-

curacy of the results, making it hard to evaluate how close the

success threshold reported by this analysis (even for large values

of ) is to the real success threshold. In comparison, the analysis

proposed in this paper lends itself to closed-form update equa-

tions consisting of only simple operations (addition/subtraction

and multiplication/division). As a result, the analysis is faster

and, more importantly, more accurate.

The goal of this study is to develop a simple and accurate

framework for the asymptotic analysis (as

,

)

of NB-VB algorithms over sparse random sensing graphs and

extend it to include recovery algorithms of similar nature such

as that of [3]. In our analysis, we assume that the measurements

are noiseless. We demonstrate that the recovery algorithms can

be described by a first-order time-varying Markov chain. We

thus track the distribution of the states of this Markov chain

through iterations in the analysis. We still refer to the analysis

as density evolution, a terminology used for the analysis of it-

erative message-passing algorithms of low-density parity-check

(LDPC) codes [36]. We however note that the analysis presented

here fundamentally differs from the conventional density evo-

lution where the message passing is extrinsic [36]. The purpose

is to find the transition probabilities between different states of

the Markov chain as the iterations progress. The computational

complexity of the proposed analysis thus increases linearly with

the number of iterations. The calculation of transition probabili-

ties includes simple mathematical operations, more specifically

addition and multiplication, as opposed to solving complex sys-

tems of coupled differential equations, as is the case in [23]. To

be more precise, in [23], the variables involved in the equations

are the expected values of certain random variables, such as the

normalized number of edges of certain type. These random vari-

ables determine the status of the decoder. In our analysis, we

calculate the probabilities of events involving similar or related

random variables, and/or their densities. One should, however,

note that for a sensing graph in which each signal element af-

fects measurements and each measurement is a linear com-

bination of signal elements, where and are fixed and

positive integers, the number of states in the proposed anal-

ysis is

. This is in comparison with

and

differential equations in [23] for LM1-NB and

LM2-NB, respectively. As part of our asymptotic analysis, we

also discuss concentration results which certify that the perfor-

mance of a recovery algorithm for a random choice of the input

signal and the sensing matrix is very close to what is predicted

by the density evolution results at the limit of

.

Using the proposed analysis, we can determine the distribu-

tion of the decoder states at any desired iteration. By tracking

the distribution of the decoder states with iterations, we then find

the success threshold of different NB-VB algorithms. More-

over, using the proposed density evolution analysis, we perform

a comprehensive study and comparison of performance of dif-

ferent VB recovery algorithms over a variety of sparse graphs.

Our simulations show that the behavior of VB algorithms, when

applied to signals with large lengths (in the order of ), are in

good agreement with the asymptotic analytical results.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,

we introduce the class of bipartite graphs and input signals

of interest in this paper. We also provide a more detailed

description of VB algorithms in this section. In Section III,

the decoding process for each VB algorithm is discussed

further. Also in this section, we discuss the important notion

of false verification and its probability for VB algorithms. A

message-passing interpretation of the recovery algorithms is

presented in Section IV. In this section, we also make a more

detailed distinction between NB and MB recovery algorithms.

The analysis framework will be introduced in Section V. We

propose a simple modification of VB algorithms to deal with

noisy measurements in Section VI. Simulation results will

be presented in Section VII. The Appendix is devoted to the

derivation of the transition probabilities.

II. BACKGROUND

A. Ensembles of Sensing Graphs and Inputs

A bipartite graph (or bigraph)

is defined as a

graph whose set of vertices

is divided into two disjoint

sets and , so that every edge in the set of edges connects

a vertex in to one in . Corresponding to each such graph, a

biadjacency matrix

of size

is formed as follows:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6619

the entry is 1 if there exists an edge

connecting the

vertex

to the vertex

; and is 0, otherwise.

Let and be two positive integers. Consider a bigraph

with

and

, so that each vertex

in

is incident to

vertices in

. Clearly,

. We refer to this bigraph as an

-bireg-

ular graph. The biadjacenecy matrix

associated to an

-biregular graph has 1’s in each row and 1’s

in each column.

Moreover, a bipartite weighted graph (or weighted bigraph)

is a generalization of the bigraph

in the sense that a weight

is as-

sociated with each edge

. The biadjacency matrix

corresponding to the weighted bigraph is acquired from the

biadjacency matrix

of the underlying bigraph by re-

placing nonzero values in

with . A regular bipartite

weighted graph (or weighted biregular graph) is defined simi-

larly.

For given parameters , and

, let

denote the ensemble of all

-biregular

graphs. Let us assume an arbitrary, but fixed, labeling scheme

for vertex sets and over the ensemble. Further, let be a

matrix of size

of weights drawn i.i.d. according to a dis-

tribution , and

be the ensemble of all such matrices.

Now for any biregular graph

and

any weight matrix

, we form the corresponding

-weighted biregular graph

as

follows. To every edge

,

,

,

connecting th vertex from and th vertex from , we assign

the weight

; i.e., the weight in row and column

of the weight matrix . Thus, we construct the ensemble of all

-weighted biregular graphs, denoted by

,

by freely combining elements in

and

.

Thus far, we have described the ensemble of graphs that are of

interest in this work. In what follows, we describe the ensemble

of inputs of interest. Let

be a fixed real number and

be a vector of length with elements drawn i.i.d. according

to a probability distribution function defined as follows: the el-

ement is zero with probability

, or follows a distribution

with probability (i.e.,

, where

is the Dirac delta function). We denote the ensemble of all such

vectors by

.4 The subset of all the input signal elements

with nonzero values is called the support set of the signal.

In compressed sensing, each measurement is a linear com-

bination of the signal elements. With a slight abuse of nota-

tion, we use

for both the label and the value of the th

measurement (the th signal element). We denote by and ,

the column vectors of the measurements ’s

,

and the signal elements ’s

, respectively. The

underlying system of linear combinations can then be repre-

sented by the matrix multiplication

. In this paper, the

sensing matrix is the biadjacency matrix of a weighted bi-

graph

drawn uniformly at random from the

4It is worth noting that the expected fraction of nonzero elements in such a vector is . Using the Chernoff bound, it can be shown that the actual fraction of nonzero elements in a randomly chosen vector from this ensemble is tightly concentrated around its expected value with high probability.

ensemble

. Henceforth, we refer to the graph as the

sensing graph. Moreover, the signal vector is drawn uniformly

at random from the ensemble

. The sets of signal elements

and measurements are, respectively, mapped to the vertex sets

and

. The coefficient of the th signal

element

in the linear combination associated with the

th measurement

, the entry in , is the entry of

the biadjacency matrix

of .

Following the terminology frequently used in the context of

coding,5 we refer to the sets and as the variable nodes

and check nodes, respectively. We will interchangeably use

the terms variable nodes and signal elements as well as check

nodes and measurements. The main focus of this paper is on

the weighted biregular graphs. The results, however, can be

generalized to irregular graphs.

B. Previous Work on VB Algorithms
Luby and Mitzenmacher [32] proposed and analyzed two iterative algorithms over bigraphs for packet-based error correction in the context of channel coding. In these algorithms, a variable node can be in one of the two states: “verified” or “unverified.” Under certain circumstances, a variable node is verified and a value is assigned to it. This node then contributes to the verification of other variable nodes. The decoding process continues until either the entire set of unverified variable nodes is verified, or the process makes no further progress while there are still some unverified variables. Due to the verification nature of the process, the two algorithms in [32] are called VB algorithms. If the assigned value to a variable node at a certain iteration is different from its true value, a false verification has occurred. In Section III, we discuss sufficient conditions for VB algorithms so that the probability of false verification is zero.
The verification process in VB algorithms can be seen as a message-passing procedure. In general, a variable node sends its current state (either verified or unverified) to its neighboring check nodes along with its value (if verified). A check node processes the received messages and subsequently sends some messages to its neighboring variable nodes. Each unverified variable node decides on its next state, either verified or unverified, based on the received messages from check nodes. The process of passing messages between variable nodes and check nodes continues until all variable nodes are verified, or no variable node changes its state.
In message-passing algorithms, a node can take two approaches in order to produce an MB on the set of received messages. In the first approach, the outgoing message is a function of all received messages. In this case, all messages leaving a node at a certain iteration are the same. In the second approach, the message passed from node to node in the bigraph, is a function of all the received messages by node
except the received message from node . Therefore, the outgoing messages of a node at a certain iteration may be different, depending on the received messages. In the context of VB algorithms, the first approach is known as NB, while the
5In the context of coding, a linear code can be represented by a bigraph, where the two sets of nodes represent the code symbols, and the linear parity-check constraints that the symbols have to satisfy [37].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

second approach is called MB [20], [23].6 So, for an NB-VB

algorithm, the state of a variable node is reported identically

by all its outgoing messages, while in an MB-VB algorithm,

different states may be reported by different outgoing messages

of a variable node.

As noted in [23], the authors in [32] defined the two VB algo-

rithms using the NB representation but analyzed them using the

MB representation. In [23], the authors proved that for one of

the VB algorithms, the NB and MB versions perform the same,

but for the other VB algorithm, the NB version outperforms the

MB one. In compressed sensing, this implies that NB versions,

in general, have higher success thresholds; i.e., can successfully

recover signals with larger density ratios [21].

A well-known method to analyze iterative message-passing

algorithms in coding theory is density evolution [36]. In den-

sity evolution, the distribution of messages is tracked with the

iteration number. The evolution of the message distributions

with iterations will then reveal important properties of the de-

coding algorithm such as decoding threshold and convergence

speed [36]. The derivation of the message distribution, how-

ever, requires the independence among the incoming messages

to a node. The analysis is thus only applicable to extrinsic mes-

sage-passing algorithms (MB decoders). To analyze NB algo-

rithms, Zhang and Pfister [23] derived a system of coupled dif-

ferential equations. For

graphs, the number of differ-

ential equations is

for the simpler algorithm of

LM1-NB. It is difficult, if not impossible, to find a closed-form

solution for the system of differential equations even for small

values of and .7 Numerical methods were thus used in [23]

to solve the system of differential equations and consequently

evaluate the performance of NB algorithms. This process, how-

ever, is susceptible to numerical errors. In addition, it is hard to

know how the obtained threshold for a given finite value of

compares with the exact threshold, which applies in the asymp-

totic regime of

. What happens in practice is that the nu-

merical results are highly dependent on the selected, large but

still finite, value of .

III. VB ALGORITHMS, VERIFICATION RULES AND FALSE VERIFICATION
A. VB Algorithms and Verification Rules
In compressed sensing, the decoder receives the vector of measurements and aims at estimating the original signal based on the knowledge of measurements and the sensing graph. In this section, we discuss four VB decoding algorithms.
The first algorithm, here referred to as “Genie”, is a benchmark VB algorithm in which the support set of the signal is known at the decoder. We use the Genie algorithm and its analysis to motivate and explain the analytical framework. The success threshold associated with this algorithm serves as an upper bound for the performance of other VB algorithms.8
6In the context of iterative decoding algorithms, NB and MB approaches are known as nonextrinsic and extrinsic message-passing, respectively [38].
7The number of differential equations for LM1-NB over a (3, 6) bigraph is 30.
8The Genie algorithm is essentially the same as the peeling algorithm over the erasure channel proposed in [34]. In particular, the two algorithms have the same threshold.

In other recovery algorithms, the decoder has no information about the support set. The next two decoders considered in this paper are the two main VB decoding algorithms in the context of compressed sensing. The first algorithm is referred to as LM, to stand for Luby and Mitzenmacher [32]. The same algorithm is called LM1 in [20]. The second main VB algorithm is the algorithm introduced in [18], which is the same as the second algorithm discussed in [20]; LM2. We refer to this algorithm as SBB, for Sarvotham, Baron and Baraniuk.
By the description given in Section II-B, the algorithm in [3], here referred to as XH, for Xu and Hassibi, also falls into the category of VB algorithms, and can also be analyzed using the proposed framework. The details of the analysis for this algorithm, however, are not included in this paper. We just report some numerical results on the success threshold and the convergence speed of this algorithm in Section VII.
In what follows, we give the general description of the aforementioned VB algorithms, as found in the literature [3], [20], [22], [23]. We then use this description to discuss the issue of false verification. In Section IV, we present the equivalent message-passing description of the VB algorithms.
In the VB algorithms, the check node values are initialized with the measurements. When a variable node is verified at an iteration, its verified value is subtracted from the value of its neighboring check nodes. The variable node, then, is removed from the sensing bigraph along with all its adjacent edges. Hence, all the neighboring check nodes of the verified variable node face a reduction in their degree. In the next iteration, some variable nodes may be verified based on the degree and/or the value of their neighboring check nodes. The rules based on which the variable nodes are verified at each iteration are called verification rules and are as follows.
1) Zero Check Node (ZCN): If a check node has a zero value, all its neighboring variable nodes are verified with a zero value.
2) Degree One Check Node (D1CN): If a check node has degree 1 in a graph, its unique neighboring variable node is verified with the value of the check node.
3) Equal Check Nodes (ECN): Suppose we have check nodes with the same nonzero value, then a) all variable nodes neighboring a subset of these check nodes (not all of them) are verified with the value zero; b) if there exists a unique variable node neighboring all check nodes, then it is verified with the common value of the check nodes.
Verification rules ZCN and ECN are responsible for verifying variable nodes not in the support set. Since, the Genie algorithm has the complete knowledge of the support set, it has no need to apply these two rules. Hence, D1CN is the only rule used by the Genie. Other VB algorithms, each uses a combination of verification rules in order to verify and resolve unverified variable nodes. Assuming zero probability for false verification, the order in which the rules are applied does not affect the overall performance of the algorithm; it will only change the order in which variable nodes are verified. Verification rules adopted by different algorithms are summarized in Table I.
Based on Table I, SBB applies the union of all rules to verify variable nodes. Therefore, this algorithm is expected to have the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6621

TABLE I VERIFICATION RULES ADOPTED IN EACH VB ALGORITHM

is zero. Using the union bound, one can see that the probability of false verification in any iteration and also in the whole recovery algorithm is zero.

IV. VB RECOVERY ALGORITHMS AS MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS
A. Definitions and Setup

There are a number of VB decoding algorithms that can be

highest success threshold amongst the practical VB algorithms formulated as NB-MP algorithms. These are the algorithms that

discussed here. This is verified in Section VII.

are of interest to us in this paper. Each algorithm works in iter-

The ECN rule as stated above cannot be easily captured in the ations through exchanging messages between the check nodes

analysis. Based on our extensive simulations, we conjecture that and the variable nodes along the edges in the graph. Any mes-

this recovery rule can be modified to read as follows (without sage sent from a variable node to its neighboring check nodes

affecting the asymptotic behavior of the recovery algorithms). belongs to an alphabet set

. The first coordi-

Modified ECN: Suppose we have check nodes with the nate of such a message is a status flag, sometimes referred to

same nonzero value. Then, if there exists a unique variable node as “recovery flag”, taking binary values. The flag indicates the

neighbor to all such check nodes, it is verified with the common verification status of the variable node. If this flag is 0, then the

value of the check nodes. In this case, all other variable nodes variable node is not verified. If, on the other hand, the flag is 1,

connected to those check nodes are verified as zero.

then the variable node has been verified. In this case, the second

B. False Verification9

coordinate, which is a real number, is interpreted as the verified value of the variable node.

Let denote the set of nonzero variable nodes in the signal; Similarly, any message sent from a check node to all its neigh-

the support set. Also, let

denote the set of variable nodes boring variable nodes belongs to an alphabet set

.

neighbor to a check node . Now, consider the following facts. The first coordinate of such a message indicates the number of

1) Let be an arbitrary subset of check nodes. If all the check unverified variable nodes neighbor to the check node. The first

nodes in are neighbor to the same subset of nodes in , coordinate is in fact the degree of the check node in the sub-

then all these check nodes have the same value.

graph induced by the unverified variable nodes. The second co-

2) Any check node with no neighbor in has a zero value. ordinate indicates the current value of the check node, i.e., the

Verification rules ZCN and ECN in VB algorithms are de- result of the linear combination of the unverified neighboring

signed based on the following assumptions:

variable nodes.

The edges, in NB-MP algorithms, do not simply forward mes-

1 ) Let be any arbitrary subset of check nodes with the same value. Then all these check nodes are neighbor to the same subset of .
2 ) None of the variable nodes neighbor to a zero valued check node belongs to the set .
It is worth noting that the assumptions 1 and 2 are the converses of the facts 1 and 2, respectively. To any choice of distributions and for nonzero weights of the sensing graph and nonzero signal elements, respectively, corresponds a certain probability that the converses fail to hold. Those distributions which make the converses hold true with probability 1 (almost surely) are of interest in this paper. In the following theorem, we give an example of distributions that make the statements 1 and 2 hold true almost surely.

sages from check nodes to variable nodes and vice versa. In-

stead, based on the traveling direction of the message, edges

multiply or divide the second coordinate of the message by their

associated weight. More specifically, if the message is sent from

a variable node to a check node, its second coordinate is multi-

plied by the weight. The second coordinate of the message is di-

vided by the weight, if the message is sent from a check node to

a variable node. So, although messages generated by a node (ei-

ther variable node or check node) are sent identically over all ad-

jacent edges, the fact that the edges may have different weights

will result in different messages being received at the destina-

tion nodes. All such messages are independent if the weights

associated with the corresponding edges are independent.

Any iteration

in NB-VB algorithms, consists of two

Theorem 1: Let and be two distinct check nodes and rounds, denoted by R1 and R2, each with two half-rounds,

and be their corresponding set of neighboring variable denoted by HR1 and HR2. In the R1-HR1 and R2-HR1,

nodes in ; i.e.,

and

. Suppose every check node processes all its received messages from the

that at least one of the distributions or described before is previous round together with its associated measurement and

continuous. Then, the statements 1 and 2 , described above, are sends out a message from the alphabet to all its neighboring

correct with probability one for and .

variable nodes. In the R1-HR2 and R2-HR2, each (unveri-

The continuity of or is a sufficient condition to have the probability of false verification equal to zero. In the rest of the paper, we assume that the statements 1 and 2 are correct with probability one and consequently, the probability of false verification for a variable node in any iteration of the VB algorithms

fied) variable node decides on its next state by processing all its received messages. Whatever the decision, the variable node sends back a message, from the alphabet , to all its neighboring check nodes. So, a round starts with check nodes processing the received messages from neighboring variable

9The ideas presented in this section are simple extension of those in [20] and nodes, proceeds with the transmission of messages from check

[21].

nodes to variable nodes, continues by variable nodes processing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

B. Message-Passing Description of Recovery Algorithms

To describe the four VB recovery algorithms using the mes-

sage-passing approach, we need to define the mappings ,

, and . Mapping embeds the verification rules D1CN

and ECN, while the mapping

embeds the ZCN rule. To

make the description of mappings and simpler, we in-

Fig. 1. Message-Passing in HR1 of a typical round. (a) Variable node to check node. (b) Check node processing. (c) Check node to variable node.

troduce some notations to represent the incoming messages to

variable and check nodes from the alphabet sets and , re-

spectively. A message

, incoming to a variable node, is

an ordered pair of elements

, where

,

.A

message

, incoming to a check node, is an ordered pair

of elements

, where

,

. Moreover, we

assume that there is an arbitrary numbering for edges adjacent

to a node (either variable node or check node). So, we use the

notations ,

, and ,

, to denote the

Fig. 2. Message-Passing in HR2 of a typical round. (a) Check node to variable incoming messages to variable nodes and check nodes, respec-

node. (b) Variable node processing. (c) Variable node to check node.

tively.

At iteration zero, all variable nodes are unverified and there is

the received messages from neighboring check nodes, and ends no received message at the check nodes. At this stage, all check

with the transmission of messages from variable nodes to check nodes send their corresponding measurements along with their

nodes. The two rounds in each iteration follow the same general degree to their neighboring variable nodes. For the following

structure. They only differ in the processing carried out in the iterations

, the mapping function at any check node is

variable nodes.

as follows:

In Figs. 1 and 2, we have shown the snapshots of message

passing between a variable node of degree 3 and a check node

of degree 4. The snapshots represent the two half-rounds (HR1

and HR2) of a generic round of recovery.

Let

and

,

,

represent the mappings used at any unverified variable node to

map the incoming messages to the outgoing message in the first

and the second round of iteration , respectively. Obviously, due

to the VB nature of the algorithms, when a variable node be-

comes verified at an iteration, its outgoing message remains un-

changed, irrespective of its incoming messages. In contrast to

the variable nodes, the mapping function used in check nodes

is identical for both the first and the second round of each itera-

tion. Every check node has an associated received measurement;

a random variable taking values in . So, we use the notation

,

, to denote the mapping function

used in all check nodes at iteration . For the sake of complete-

ness, let

and

repre-

sent the mappings used, respectively, in all variable nodes and

check nodes at iteration 0. This iteration consists of only one

round. For the VB algorithms under consideration, the mapping

functions in the variable nodes and check nodes are not a func-

tion of the iteration number. Therefore, we omit the superscript

henceforth.

In what follows, we describe VB algorithms of Section III

as message-passing algorithms with the general structure ex-

plained previously.10

where in the above equation is the measurement associated

with the check node , and

is the message re-

ceived along the th edge. The mapping functions , are

algorithm dependent and are discussed for each VB algorithm

separately next.

The decoder stops at an iteration ,

, if the algorithm

makes no further progress, i.e., the set of verified variable nodes

are the same for the two consecutive iterations

and .

Equivalently, the algorithm stops if the messages sent from vari-

able nodes to check nodes, and also from check nodes to variable

nodes, are the same for two consecutive iterations and . At

this point, if the decoder is able to verify all the variable nodes,

then the decoding is called successful. Otherwise, the decoder

will declare a failure.

Genie: In this algorithm, each iteration consists of only one

round, in which one verification rule (D1CN) is applied to all

variable nodes. For variable nodes not in the support set, the out-

going message in all iterations is fixed and equals

.

For any variable node in the support set, the mapping

is defined based on the following rules.

• Rule 1: If among all received messages (from the neigh-

boring check nodes), there exists only one message,

say ,

, such that

,

, then

. In this case, the variable node

is verified with the value .

10It is worth mentioning that the message-passing description of SBB and XH algorithms (in particular, ), presented in Section IV-B, is only valid for the cases in which the nonzero weights of the sensing graph are drawn from an uncountable or countably infinite alphabet set. If the elements of the sensing matrix are drawn from a finite alphabet set, such as binary 0 and 1, the outgoing messages from a check node should also include the list of all unverified variable nodes neighbor to the check node. The mapping function in the variable nodes should also change in order to use the extra information in the incoming messages. Also see Footnote 12.

• Rule 2: If multiple messages exist in the form

(any

), then choose one at random, say

,

, and set

. In this case,

the variable node is verified with the value .

• Rule 3: If none of the above happens, then

. In this case, the vari-

able node is still unverified.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6623

For any unverified variable node, the mappings and are defined according to the following sets of rules, for LM, SBB, and XH, respectively.

LM:

•

: Apply Rules 1–3 of Genie.

•

:

— Rule 4: If there exists at least one message

such that

(for any

), then

. In this case, the variable

node is verified with the value equal to 0.

— Rule 5: If no incoming message exists in the form

(for any

), then

. In this case, the variable

node is still unverified.

SBB:11

•

:

— Apply Rule 1 of Genie.

— If there exist messages

, such

that

, then

. In this case, the variable node is verified with

the common value .12

— If a variable node is verified to different values ac-

cording to verification rules above, then choose one

at random and generate the outgoing message accord-

ingly.

— Apply Rule 3 of Genie.

•

: Apply Rules 4 and 5 of LM.

XH:

•

:

— If there exist messages

C. Short Note on False Verification
In the above description of recovery algorithms, there may be cases where a variable node can be verified to different values by different rules. Using the same assumption made in Section III-B, it is easy to see that the probability of this event is equal to zero. In such cases, we have thus assumed that the variable node is verified by one of the rules selected randomly. Clearly, the probability of false verification as a result of such selections is zero.

V. ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK

In this section, we first show that 1) the performance of a

realization of the sensing graph, with a certain selection of the

edge weights for the recovery of a realization of the input signal

concentrates around the average performance of the ensemble

(where the average is taken over all the elements in the ensemble

, for given probability distribution functions

, , and given constant parameters , , and ), as tends to

infinity, and 2) the average performance of the ensemble, as

goes to infinity, converges to the performance of the cycle-free

case defined as follows.

Let be the neighborhood of node of depth , i.e., the

subgraph consisting of the variable node and all those nodes

that are connected to with any path of length less than or equal

to . We say that we are working under the cycle-free assump-

tion when for a fixed , and for every , is tree-like.

Following the concentration results, we present the asymp-

totic analysis of the Genie algorithm. The analysis provides us

with the average ensemble performance for the asymptotic case

of

. We then generalize the concepts used in the analysis

of Genie and analyze LM and SBB algorithms. The analysis of

XH is similar and is omitted to prevent redundancy. However,

we shall report the thresholds of this decoder for different bireg-

ular graphs in Section VII.

, such that

, then

. In this case, the variable

node is verified with the common value .

— If a variable node is verified to different values ac-

cording to the verification rule above, i.e., if two groups

of messages both at least of size

satisfy the above

condition, then choose one at random and generate the

outgoing message accordingly.

— Apply Rule 3 of Genie.

•

: Apply Rules 4 and 5 of LM.

11The original recovery algorithm introduced in [18] has a computational

complexity of

(which translates to

when using

biregular graphs of fixed degrees). It is easy to prove that the message-passing

description provided here does not change the recovery capability of the algo-

rithm but results in the reduction of decoding complexity from

to

.

12We note that the message received by the variable node equals the message sent from the check node divided by the weight of the connecting edge. Therefore, receiving messages with the same value would imply that, almost surely, the unverified variable node under consideration is the unique nonzero variable node neighbor to the check nodes. Other unverified variable nodes neighbor to these check nodes do not belong to the support set and should be verified with a value equal to zero. This, however, happens in the next round.

A. Concentration Results and Convergence to Cycle-Free Case

Consider a weighted graph selected at random from

. Also consider an input signal vector chosen

randomly from

. Suppose that a VB algorithm is applied

to the measurement vector

to recover iteratively,

where is the biadjacency matrix of the chosen weighted

graph. For this scenario, let

be the

fraction of unverified nonzero variable nodes at the beginning

of iteration , i.e., the fraction of variable to check node mes-

sages passed along the edges of the chosen weighted graph

with unverified status (sent by nonzero variable nodes); further,

let

denote the expected value of , where the expec-

tation is taken over the ensembles

and

. Now,

consider the corresponding cycle-free case, and let be the

expected number of messages with unverified status passed

along an edge emanating from a nonzero variable node with a

tree-like neighborhood of depth at least at the th iteration.

Here, again, the expectation is taken over the ensembles of

input signals and weighted graphs.

In the subsequent subsections, we will show how can be

calculated. It should be clear that , being defined as the “av-

erage” over the ensemble of weighted graphs and input vectors,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6624

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

is the same as the “probability” that a message from a nonzero

variable node with a tree-like neighborhood of depth at least ,

at the th iteration, carries an unverified status. In this section,

we use the interpretation of as an average. The interpreta-

tion of as a probability will be used in the analysis section.

In the following, we will show that over all realizations, with

high probability, does not deviate much from

, and

, itself, is not far from , as tends to infinity.

Theorem 2: Over the probability space of all weighted graphs

, and all signal inputs

, for a fixed , letting

and be defined as above, for each of the NB-VB al-

gorithms discussed in this paper, there exist positive constants

and

, such that 1) for any

(1)

and 2) for any

, and

(2)

Note that combining (1) and (2), the following holds: for any , and

Our method of proof for Theorem 2 is similar to that of [36], though due to the differences in the nature of the problems (channel coding versus compressed sensing) and the difference in the update equations at the graph nodes, some arguments are revised and some new components are added to the proof. We refer the reader to [39] for the details of the proof.

, in the HR1, check nodes process the received messages from

variable nodes sent at iteration

and generate outgoing

messages to be delivered to variable nodes. We partition the

check nodes based on their -degree. The set of check nodes

with -degree after the (processing in the) HR1 of iteration

, is represented by

. A check node with -degree

before HR1 may have a degree

after HR1. In HR2, the

variable nodes process the incoming messages and generate

outgoing messages accordingly. Variable nodes, are also par-

titioned based on the number of neighboring check nodes of

-degree 1. The unverified variable nodes with neighboring

check nodes of -degree 1 after the (processing in the) HR2

of iteration are represented by

. Note that the grouping

of check nodes remains unchanged during the HR2 of the

same iteration. In a similar way, the grouping of variable nodes

remains unchanged during the HR1 of the next iteration.

In the HR1 of iteration zero, every check node sends its corre-

sponding measurement value along with its degree, . In HR2,

variable nodes in

return a verified message with a value

equal to 0, while variable nodes in return a message with

the status bit equal to zero. At iteration 0, the set

includes

all unverified variable nodes .

In the HR1 of iteration 1, an outgoing message of a check

node has the following two properties: 1) the second coordinate

of the message is still equal to the measurement value for the

check node since no variable node from the support set was

verified at iteration 0, and 2) the first coordinate of the message,

which is the -degree of the check node, is less than or equal to

since the variable nodes not in the support set

have been revealed at iteration 0, thus reducing the number of

unverified variable nodes connected to the check nodes. We use

the notation to refer to the subset of check nodes

B. Analysis of the Genie13

that are moved to

. The arrow points downward in the

notation to emphasize that

. Note that for iteration 1,

In the Genie algorithm, the support set is known. Therefore, .

the set of all variable nodes can be partitioned into two sets: In the HR2 of iteration 1, after receiving the messages from

verified and unverified . At iteration zero, variable nodes check nodes, variable nodes in

are partitioned into the

in the support set are unverified, and the zero-valued variable sets

,

. We denote by the set of variable

nodes belong to the verified set. In future iterations, during the verification process, variable nodes are moved from set to set
. We use notations and to denote the set of unverified and verified variable nodes at (the beginning of) iteration , respectively. We also use the superscript to indicate the iteration number for all the other sets in this section in the same way. Our goal in the analysis is to track the evolution of the subgraph induced by the variable nodes in . This is the sub-

nodes in

joining the set

. In this case,

,

hence the use of the arrow pointing up. Based on the verification

rule for the Genie, at any iteration if an unverified variable

node is neighbor to at least one check node in the set

, it

will be verified. So, variable nodes in the set

are

verified at the end of iteration 1. Therefore, the new sets

and to be used at iteration 2 are calculated as follows:

graph that is actively involved in the message-passing process.

In the following, when we refer to the degree of a check node,

we implicitly mean the degree of the check node in this sub-

graph. To make this explicit, we may use the term -degree.

Similarly, the term -degree may be used. Clearly, the sum of the -degree and the -degree of each check node is .
Each iteration of the Genie algorithm consists of only one round (two half-rounds, HR1 and HR2). At a generic iteration

The message-passing and verification processes continue in next iterations in the same fashion discussed previously. In summary, in a generic iteration , we have the following relationships:

13An analysis of the Genie algorithm (peeling decoder) over the erasure channel is given in [34]. Unlike the approach adopted in this study, the analysis of [34] is based on modeling the progress of iterative decoding with a set of differential equations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS TABLE II
PROBABILITIES INVOLVED IN THE ANALYSIS OF GENIE IN TABLE III
TABLE III DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF GENIE

6625

C. General Framework for the Analysis of LM and SBB

In LM and SBB, at the beginning of any iteration , the set of

all variable nodes is partitioned into three sets: , , and

. The set

consists of all unverified nonzero variable

nodes, while the set consists of all unverified zero-valued

variable nodes. The set

includes all the verified variable

nodes. Clearly, the decoder cannot make the distinction between

By tracking the set with iterations, we can decide on the

success or failure of the algorithm. If the size of the set

shrinks to zero as

, then the algorithm is successful. On

the other hand, if there exists an

such that

,

, then the algorithm fails. The success or failure of the

algorithm depends on the parameters of the graph ( and )

as well as the initial size of the support set

.

Based on the concentration results, to analyze the Genie in

the asymptotic case, we track the probability that a vari-

able node belongs to the set . Hence, we focus on a tree-

like graph with random weights and a random input signal. Let

,

, denote the probability that a check node

belongs to the set

. Furthermore, let

,

,

denote the probability that an unverified (nonzero) variable node

belongs to the set

. In Table II, we have summarized the

terminologies used in the analysis of Genie, and in Table III, we

have presented the step-by-step procedure to update the proba-

bilities

,

, and , for

, in terms of probabili-

variable nodes in the sets and . The distinction between

the two sets, however, is needed for the analysis.

Furthermore, at any iteration , we partition the set of all

check nodes into subsets . The index indicates the number

of neighboring variable nodes in the set while the index

indicates the number of neighboring variable nodes in the set

. This is shown in Fig. 3. The two indices are referred to as

- and -degrees of the check nodes, respectively. Note that:

1) the degree of each check node in the subgraph induced by un-

verified variable nodes, at iteration (reflected in the outgoing

message of the check node), is , and 2) the second coordi-

nate of messages received by a variable node in the support set

from check nodes in the sets ,

, is the same.

In algorithms LM and SBB, each iteration consists of two

rounds, each with two half-rounds. The configuration of the

sets at the end of each half-round (HR1 or HR2), each round

(R1 or R2), and each iteration , is specified using the fol-

lowing four superscripts:

,

,

, and

, where the term “HR” (for half round) is dropped for a

ties

,

, and

. The derivation details can be simpler notation. In the first half-rounds (any round and any iter-

found in Part B of the Appendix.

ation), messages are passed from check nodes to variable nodes,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6626

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

for the two algorithms LM and SBB, respectively. The proofs are rather straightforward and follow from the verification rules for LM and SBB, respectively.

Theorem 3: In the first round of any iteration in the LM

algorithm, a nonzero variable node

is verified if and

only if it belongs to the set

.

Fig. 3. Each check node in the set has connections to the variable nodes in set and connections to the variable nodes in set .
TABLE IV SETS THAT ARE AFFECTED IN EACH HALF-ROUND OF EACH ROUND AT ANY
ITERATION OF LM AND SBB

Theorem 4: In the first round of any iteration in the SBB

algorithm, a nonzero variable node

is verified if and

only if it belongs to the set

, where the

set

consists of all variable nodes in the set

connected to the set

.

In LM and SBB algorithms, unverified variable nodes with

zero values are verified in R2. Note that a check node is zero-

valued if it belongs to the set

,

. Therefore,

for the verification of zero-valued variable nodes in the second

round of iteration , we partition the set of variable nodes in

into subsets ,

, with the following definition:

a variable node in the set

has neighboring check nodes

in the set

, i.e., the set of

check nodes which became zero-valued after HR1 of R2. In Theorem 5, we characterize the verification of unverified zerovalued variable nodes in the set at R2-HR2 in each iteration
of LM and SBB algorithms.

Fig. 4. Difference in the Definition of in LM versus SBB.

while in the second half-rounds, messages are passed from vari-

able nodes to check nodes. Also, based on the definition of map-

ping functions

and

, verified variable nodes in the

first and the second rounds belong to the sets and , re-

spectively. We have summarized in Table IV the sets that are

affected in each half-round (HR) of each round (R) at any iter-

ation.

The set

in the LM algorithm represents the

set of unverified variable nodes in the support set with

neighboring check nodes in the set

. The defini-

tion of set

for the SBB algorithm is different. Let

. With this notation, the set in the SBB algorithm is defined as the set of unverified variable nodes in the support set with neighboring check nodes in the
set . These sets are shown in Fig. 4 for the two algorithms. In Theorems 3 and 4, we characterize the verification of un-
verified nonzero variable nodes in the set in each iteration

Theorem 5: In the second half-round of the second round of

any iteration in the LM and SBB algorithms, a zero-valued

variable node

is verified if and only if it belongs to the

set

.

We denote by

the set of check nodes that are moved

from

to

in R1-HR1 of iteration . Simi-

larly, the set of check nodes that are moved from

to

in R2-HR1 of iteration is denoted by

. Since

variable nodes in and are verified through iterations, we al-

ways have

and hence the use of notation . Moreover,

in SBB, we denote the set of variable nodes that are moved from

to

in R1-HR2 of iteration by

.

The sets that fully describe the state of the decoder at the

beginning of iteration are: , , ,

,

, and

. For the analysis, we track the

probability that a node (variable node or check node) belongs

to a certain set at each half-round, round, or iteration. We use

the notation to denote the probability that a variable node

belongs to the set . For the rest of the sets, we use the stan-

dard notation of probabilities that was applied in the analysis

of the Genie algorithm. For instance, we denote the probability

that a check node belongs to the set

by

.

In the analysis, the goal is to find the recursive equations that

relate the probabilities of different sets for consecutive itera-

tions. As we shall see, the analysis of the decoding process for

LM and SBB results in a system of coupled recursive update

equations. Moreover, we show that the update equations at iter-

ation are functions of probabilities at iteration

. Hence,

the complexity of the analysis scales linearly with the number of

iterations. In Section V-D, we present the update equations for

LM and SBB algorithms. The derivation of formulas are dis-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS
TABLE V SETS INVOLVED IN THE ANALYSIS OF LM AND SBB ALGORITHMS

6627

TABLE VI SETS INVOLVED IN THE ANALYSIS OF SBB ONLY

TABLE VII PROBABILITIES THAT APPEAR IN THE UPDATE EQUATIONS OF LM AND SBB ALGORITHMS (IN ADDITION TO THE PROBABILITIES
OF THE SETS DESCRIBED IN TABLES V AND VI)

cussed in detail in Parts C and D of the Appendix for the two algorithms, respectively.
D. Update Equations for LM and SBB Algorithms

in these tables involve the probabilities of the sets described in Tables V and VI, as well as some other probabilities, defined in Table VII.

We have summarized the sets involved in the analysis of LM and SBB algorithms in Tables V and VI. The step-by-step analysis of the algorithms are presented in Tables VIII–X, respectively, where the update equations are identified by the round

VI. NOISY MEASUREMENTS
We adopt the following model for the case where the measurements are noisy [40]:

and the half-round they correspond to. The update equations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012
TABLE VIII DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF LM

In this new model, and are the original signal and the ular, it is shown in [29] that the BP algorithm is asymptotically

sensing matrix, respectively. The new term represents the optimal in the case of sparse noisy measurements. The down-

noise vector added to the noiseless measurements , resulting side to the algorithms that are based on the first approach, how-

in the noisy measurement vector . Elements of the noise vector ever, is that they are generally more complex, may require un-

are assumed to be i.i.d. Gaussian random variables with mean bounded message size and would be susceptible to approxima-

0 and variance . The addition of noise to the measurements tion errors. The authors in [3] instead equipped their VB algo-

results in the following two probabilities to be zero: 1) the prob- rithm with some thresholding techniques and proved that if the

ability of having a zero measurement, and 2) the probability of original signal is sparse enough, they are able to recover the lo-

having two equal measurements. This will disable the ZCN and cation and the sign of the nonzero signal elements successfully.

ECN rules in recovering the signal elements. Without the ZCN In what follows, we propose a similar thresholding technique to

and ECN rules, zero-valued variable nodes are not verified, and deal with the noisy measurements.

consequently, no check node will have a reduced degree in the Thresholding is a common technique in detection theory to

subgraph induced by unverified variable nodes. Therefore, the deal with noisy measurements [42]. We apply this technique to

D1CN rule will also be ineffective.

VB algorithms by defining two thresholds and . We use

In the context of message-passing algorithms, there are gener- to convert small noisy measurements to zero; i.e., any mea-

ally two approaches to deal with noisy measurements. In the first surement , such that

, is set to zero. We use as

approach, the original formulation of the problem is changed the acceptable tolerance for the equality of two noisy measure-

so that the noise is taken into consideration [25]–[29], [41]. In ments; i.e., we consider two measurements and equal if

the other approach, the algorithms are changed in order to cope

. In this case, we assign and a new common

with the presence of noise in the measurements [3]. The first ap- value equal to

. While the scope of this paper is not

proach generally results in lower reconstruction noise. In partic- to optimize thresholds and , our goal is to demonstrate the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS
TABLE IX DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF SBB—INITIALIZATION

6629

potential of thresholding in desensitizing the VB algorithms to As the measure of performance, we consider the mean square

the measurement noise. We explain this through an example and error (MSE) between the original and the recovered signal. For

by comparing the performance of the SBB algorithm equipped each value of , we perform simulations until we obtain 100

with thresholding and two methods based on minimization in “successful” recovery instances. The results for the three algo-

the case where the measurements are noisy.

rithms are reported in Fig. 5, where for each algorithm, MSE av-

Consider a signal of length

. We let the size of the eraged over all simulated cases for a given value of is shown.

support set, , to increase from 10 to 150 in steps of 10. For each As can be seen, the SBB recovery algorithm significantly (by

such support size , we pick out of the elements randomly, about two orders of magnitude) outperforms both -based al-

and assign to each element an even integer uniformly distributed gorithms.

in the range

, independent of the value of the other

nonzero elements. In the case of the SBB algorithm, the signal

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS

is measured through a (3, 6) unweighted bigraph. In the case In this section, we present simulation results obtained by run-

of -based algorithms, we use sensing matrices consisting of ning the recovery algorithms over random biregular graphs to

orthonormal columns with standard Gaussian elements [40]. In recover sparse signals of finite length from noiseless mea-

all cases, the number of measurements, , is fixed at 500. Each surements. We also present analytical results obtained through

measurement is independently contaminated with a Gaussian the mathematical analysis described in Section V for the asymp-

noise of mean 0 and variance equal to

.

totic regime when

. This includes the success threshold

For the SBB, we set both thresholds and equal to 1.99. of different VB algorithms over different biregular graphs. The

Since the value of nonzero signal elements are drawn from a comparison of asymptotic and finite-length results shows that

finite alphabet and since the graph is unweighted, false alarm there is a good agreement between the two for moderately large

may occur with nonzero probability in the recovery process. In block lengths

.

our simulations, we consider a recovery algorithm “successful” In all simulations, a signal element belongs to the support

if it can fully recover the support set.

set with probability , unless otherwise specified. Also, each

The first -based recovery algorithm is the regulariza- nonzero signal element (variable) is drawn according to a stan-

tion method introduced in [40]. For the second algorithm, we dard Gaussian distribution. The biregular graphs are constructed

empower the regularization algorithm with the knowledge randomly with no parallel edges and all the edge weights are

of the size of the support set. The algorithm thus keeps the equal to one. In each set of simulations, the sensing graph is

components that are the largest in magnitude and converts the fixed and each simulation point is generated by averaging over

rest to zero. To simulate the two -based decoders, we use the 1000 random instances of the input signal, unless specified oth-

L1MAGIC package available in [43].

erwise. We repeated each simulation with different randomly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012
TABLE X DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF SBB—RECURSIVE FORMULAS FOR

generated graphs (with the same variable and check node de- success threshold, a binary search is performed until the sepa-

grees), and observed that the results were almost identical for ration between the start and the end of the search region is less

every graph. Each simulation is run until the algorithm makes than .

no further progress. In this case, if the signal is recovered per-

fectly, the recovery is called successful, otherwise a failure is declared.
For the analytical results, based on the fact that is a non-

A. Comparison of SBB and Length

-Based Algorithms at Finite

increasing function of iteration number , we consider the fol- To motivate the use of recovery algorithms over sparse

lowing stopping criteria:

graphs, as the first set of simulation results, we present the

1)

;

comparison between the SBB algorithm and two benchmark

2)

and

.

-based algorithms, minimization [2] and iterative weighted

If the analysis is stopped based on the first stopping criterion,

minimization [44]. The setup is as follows. For SBB, we

the algorithm is considered successful. If, on the other hand, it choose a random (3, 6) biregular sensing graph with 1000

is stopped based on the second criterion, the algorithm is con- variable nodes and 500 check nodes. The sensing matrix used

sidered unsuccessful and a failure is declared. To calculate the for the two -based algorithms consists of 500 rows and 1000

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6631

Fig. 5. Comparison between SBB, minimization, and modified minimization in terms of MS reconstruction error in the presence of Gaussian measurement

noise with zero mean and variance

.

Fig. 6. Comparison between success ratios of , weighted and SBB (continuous-input/binary-sensing coefficients and binary-input/continuous-sensing coef-

ficients) for

,

.

columns. The elements are initially i.i.d. standard Gaussian is very close to the original signal, but not exactly the same,

random variables. Then, the rows are made orthonormal.

we declare a success for these two algorithms if the difference

The cost functions used in and weighted minimization between every original signal element and its corresponding

algorithms are

and

, estimate is less than

. Finally, we use the L1MAGIC

respectively, where is the original signal of interest with package in [43] as the optimization engine for simulating

elements , and is a diagonal matrix with positive diagonal and weighted minimization algorithms.

elements representing the weights. Weighted minimiza- To have a fair comparison, the same signal vectors are used

tion is an iterative algorithm in which the weights at iteration for all the algorithms. We also choose the size of the support

are updated according to

, set deterministically, and let the size range from 10 to 300. For

where

is the estimate of the signal element at iteration

. The weighted is not very sensitive to the parameter

as noted in [44]. We found

is a good choice based on

our simulations. Regarding the maximum number of iterations

for the weighted minimization algorithm, it is shown in [44]

that as this parameter increases, better results are achieved,

with the cost of longer running time. The improvement gained

by increasing the number of iterations beyond 6 however, is

negligible [44]. Therefore, in our simulations, we choose a con-

servative maximum number of iterations equal to 10. As and

weighted minimization algorithms output an estimate which

each support size, 100 instances of the signal vector are generated. Each signal vector is then measured according to the corresponding sensing mechanism for each class of algorithms. The success or failure of the recovery algorithms over the resulting measurements are then averaged over the 100 instances, and plotted in Fig. 6. In Fig. 7, the average running time, in seconds, is plotted for the three algorithms. The algorithms were implemented in MATLAB and were run on a computer with an AMD Phenom 9650 Quad-Core 2.3 GHz processor, 3 GB RAM and a Windows 7 operating system. As can be seen, the SBB algorithm recovers signals with more nonzero elements at a speed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

Fig. 7. Comparison between the average running times of , weighted and SBB for

,

.

Fig. 8. Success ratio of Genie, XH, LM and SBB algorithms vs. shown by arrows.

for (5, 6) graphs with

. Analytical thresholds are

which is about 2 orders of magnitude faster compared to that of

TABLE XI

the algorithms.

SUCCESS THRESHOLDS FOR DIFFERENT GRAPHS AND ALGORITHMS

To demonstrate that the recovery performance of NB-VB

algorithms is insensitive to the distribution of nonzero signal

elements and that of nonzero elements of the sensing matrix,

as long as at least one distribution is continuous, we perform

the same experiments, this time by selecting the nonzero signal

elements independently from the binary set

and by

choosing the nonzero elements of the sensing matrix indepen-

dently from a standard Gaussian distribution. The results for

SBB in this case are also presented in Fig. 6. As can be seen,

they are close to the results where the nonzero input signals are

Gaussian and the sensing matrix elements are binary.

function. In the figure, we have also shown the success threshold of the algorithms for (5, 6) graphs, obtained based on the proposed analysis, by arrows. As can be seen, the thresholds match very well with the waterfall region of the simulation curves.
In Table XI, we have listed the analytical success thresholds of the iterative recovery algorithms for graphs with different

B. Asymptotic and Finite-Length Results for NB-VB Algorithms

For the next experiment, we apply Genie, XH, SBB, and LM

algorithms to four randomly constructed (5, 6) regular graphs

with

. The success ratio of the al-

gorithms versus the initial density factor

are shown in

Fig. 8. From the figure, we can see that, for all algorithms, by

increasing , the transition part of the curves becomes sharper

such that the curves for

practically look like a step

and values. The result for XH algorithm on (3, 4) graphs, and

more generally for graphs with

, is missing as the algo-

rithm performs poorly on such graphs.14 For every graph, the

Genie algorithm has the best performance. This is followed by

SBB, LM, and XH algorithms, respectively. Careful inspection

of the results in Table XI indicates that the oversampling ratio

14The reason is that for

, a variable node is verified with the common

value of

check nodes. However, if two nonzero variable nodes

share the same two check nodes (a cycle of length 4 exists in the graph), then a

false verification may occur.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6633

Fig. 9. Success threshold versus compression ratio for LM, XH, SBB, and Genie algorithms.

TABLE XII SUCCESS THRESHOLDS FOR DIFFERENT GRAPHS AND ALGORITHMS FOR FIXED
COMPRESSION RATIO

TABLE XIII NUMBER OF ITERATIONS REQUIRED FOR DIFFERENT RECOVERY ALGORITHMS
OVER DIFFERENT GRAPHS TO RECOVER A SIGNAL WITH DENSITY RATIO EQUAL TO THE SUCCESS THRESHOLD MINUS 0.0001

TABLE XIV

improves consistently by decreasing both and values. In fact, among the results presented in Table XI, the application of the Genie and SBB to (3, 4) graphs results in the

NUMBER OF ITERATIONS REQUIRED FOR DIFFERENT RECOVERY ALGORITHMS

OVER DIFFERENT GRAPHS WITH FIXED COMPRESSION RATIO

,

TO RECOVER A SIGNAL WITH DENSITY RATIO EQUAL TO THE SUCCESS

THRESHOLD MINUS 0.0001

lowest oversampling ratio of

and

, respectively.

In Table XII, we have listed the analytical success thresholds

of the iterative VB recovery algorithms for graphs with com-

pression ratio

and different and values. In

general, as we decrease , algorithms perform better in terms

of recovery capability.15 This also implies that for a fixed com-

pression ratio, the oversampling ratio improves by decreasing and . We have also presented the success thresholds of NB-VB al-
gorithms versus the compression ratio for different values in Fig. 9. The same trends as discussed above can also be seen in this figure in addition to the expected result that the success threshold in general increases with the increase in the compression ratio. The relative rate of this increase for each algorithm in relation with the other algorithms follows the same trend as the relative performances, i.e., Genie has the highest rate followed by SBB, LM, and XH, respectively. In Tables XIII and XIV, we have listed the number of iterations required for different recovery algorithms to recover signals with density factor equal to the success thresholds reported in Tables XI and XII minus 0.0001, respectively. These results, which are obtained by the asymptotic analysis are in close agreement with finite-length simulation results at block lengths of about . These results indicate that with a few exceptions, the better performance comes at the expense of a larger number of iterations.

In particular, among the practical recovery algorithms, SBB re-

quires the largest number of iterations for convergence.

To further investigate the degree of agreement between our

theoretical asymptotic analysis and finite-length simulation re-

sults, we have presented in Fig. 10 the evolution of with

iterations for Genie, LM, SBB, and XH over a (5, 6) graph.

For each algorithm, two values of are selected: one above

and one below the success threshold presented in Table XI. The

theoretical results are shown by solid lines while simulations for

are presented with dotted lines. As one can see, the two

sets of results are in close agreement particularly for the cases

where is above the threshold and for smaller values of .

To demonstrate that the simulation results converge to the

asymptotic analytical results as grows, in Fig. 11, we have

added the simulation curves for

and to the SBB

curves in Fig. 10. As can be seen, the larger the value of , the

closer the simulation results to the analytical ones. In particular,

the curves for

practically coincide with the analytical

results.

15These results are consistent with the results observed for the BP decoding

Next, for different values of

, we estimate the average

of binary LDPC codes based on biregular graphs.

fraction of unverified nonzero variable nodes

using the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

Fig. 10. Evolution of versus iteration number for the four recovery algorithms over a (5, 6) graph (finite-length simulations are for

).

Fig. 11. Evolution of versus iteration number for SBB over a (5, 6) random graph (finite-length simulations are for

, , and ).

analysis, and denote the value of at the time that the anal- The results presented in Tables XI and XII are for sensing

ysis stops (because one of the stopping criteria is met) as

. graphs with compression ratio at least 0.5. We have also in-

These values are plotted versus the corresponding values of

vestigated the application of NB-VB algorithms to graphs with

in Fig. 12 for the four VB recovery algorithms over the (5, lower compression ratios. For example, simulation results on

6) sensing graphs. In the same figure, we have also given the the success ratio of SBB over random graphs with

and

corresponding simulation results for two randomly selected (5,

equal to (3, 30), (4, 40), and (3, 45) are presented in

6) sensing graphs with

and . The simulation re- Fig. 13. These graphs have compression ratios equal to 1/10,

sults for both lengths closely match the analytical results, with 1/10, and 1/15, respectively, and their success thresholds for

those of

being practically identical to the analytical SBB are 0.0338, 0.0380, and 0.0209, respectively. These thresh-

results. We have indicated the success threshold of the algo- olds are shown in Fig. 13 by vertical dashed lines, and they each

rithms by arrows. From the figure, it can also be seen that as match the waterfall region of the corresponding finite-length

increases and tends to one, the curves tend to the asymp- simulation curve. As expected, the lower compression ratio cor-

tote

.

responds to smaller density factors for the signals that can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6635

Fig. 12. Fraction of unrecoverable variable nodes versus the initial density factor for different recovery algorithms over random (5, 6) regular bipartite graphs.

The arrows represent the theoretical success thresholds. The straight line represents the function

.

Fig. 13. Success ratio of SBB versus shown by vertical dashed lines.

for graphs with

and

equal to (3, 30), (4, 40), and (3, 45). Theoretical success thresholds are

recovered using these graphs. In Fig. 9, this corresponds to the the success threshold of the former divided by the compression

tails of the curves close to the origin.

ratio , with the weak threshold of the latter. Consider two

C. Comparison of SBB and Recovery in the Asymptotic Regime of

scenarios with compression ratios

equal to 0.5 and 0.75.

The weak threshold of recovery for these cases is 0.3848

and 0.5327, respectively [45]. The corresponding values for

Strong and weak thresholds [45] are important measures

of the performance of the recovery. In particular, the weak

threshold is the largest undersampling ratio

for which the

SBB over (3, 6) and (3, 4) graphs are 0.5148 and 0.5984, respectively. In both cases, the values for SBB are larger, and indicate the superiority of SBB.

recovery and recovery are equivalent with overwhelming probability in the uniform selection of the sensing matrix for

D. Comparison With the Asymptotic Results of [23]

most input signals as

. As another way of comparing As the last experiment, we compare the running time and the

the NB-VB recovery algorithms and recovery, we compare accuracy of the proposed asymptotic analysis against those of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012
TABLE XV SUCCESS THRESHOLD AND RUNNING TIME OF THE ANALYSIS OF [23] FOR SBB OVER A RANDOM (3, 6) REGULAR GRAPH

the differential equation approach presented in [23]. For com- passing and implies that all the messages, each originating from

parison, a biregular (3, 6) graph and the SBB algorithm are nonoverlapping leaves on a tree-like neighborhood of an edge

chosen. The binary search for the success threshold starts with are independent. The former however does not require the mes-

the interval

and ends when the separation between the sage passing to be extrinsic and is a consequence of the random

start and the end of the search region in less than

. The permutation of edges between the variable nodes and the check

analysis is implemented in MATLAB and executed on the same nodes.

computer described before. Using the proposed analysis, we ob-

tain the success threshold of 0.2574 in 23.1 s. Table XV sum-

marizes the results of running the analysis of [23] on the same

machine for different values of . The reported thresholds in-

crease with the increase in . For

, the running

time is roughly 100 times that of our proposed method. More-

over, and more importantly, the obtained threshold of 0.2591 is

only in agreement with the threshold of 0.2574, obtained by the

proposed method, up to two decimal points. In fact, experiments

similar to those reported in Fig. 10 reveal that the accuracy of

the threshold obtained by the method of [23] is lower than our

results. In particular, our simulations show that the SBB algo-

rithm over (3, 6) graphs with

fails for

,

which would imply that the threshold 0.2591 is only accurate

up to two decimal points.

B. Genie:

For the analysis, we assume to have the probabilities ,

, and

, and are interested in deriving the same

probabilities for iteration .

1) Derivation of Update Equations for HR1 of Iteration ,

(Calculation of

): When a variable node is veri-

fied in HR2 of an iteration, the edges adjacent to the vari-

able node carry the recovery message to the neighboring check

nodes. These check nodes thus face a reduction in their -de-

gree. We denote by

the probability that the -degree of a

check node is reduced from to

after HR1 of iteration .

This happens if out of edges emanating from the check node

and incident to the set of unverified variable nodes , of

them now carry a message from their variable nodes indicating

that they have been verified.

On the other side of the graph, when a variable node in

APPENDIX DETAILS OF THE ANALYSIS
A. Assumptions:

is verified, by definition, out of check nodes receiving the recovery message, have -degree 1 and
have -degrees larger than 1. For each verified variable node, the set of check nodes of degree 1 are distributed

In our analysis, we often use two assumptions: “uniformity assumption” and “independence assumption.” Both assumptions are natural consequences of the randomness of the graph

uniformly with respect to the set of all check nodes of degree 1. Based on the operation of the Genie algorithm, it is easy to see that

and the input as well as the asymptotic nature of the analysis.

The uniformity assumption states that all the possible choices

within the constraints imposed by the event under consideration Furthermore, one may assume that the remaining

edges

are equally likely. As an example, consider the Genie algorithm carrying a verified message are uniformly connected to the

and the case, where an edge is connected to a variable node check nodes with -degrees larger than 1. Based on this as-

with connections to check nodes with -degree 1, and thus connections to the check nodes with other values of
-degree. Now, suppose that we are interested in calculating the probability that the other end of such an edge is connected

sumption, we derive

for

. Once these probabilities

are found, the new distribution of check node degrees

can

be derived using the total probability law

to a check node of -degree 1. The uniformity assumption

implies that this probability is equal to .

The independence assumption, on the other hand, states that

all the edges of a certain type, carry independent messages. In our analysis such messages are often identically distributed as well. As an example, consider a check node with -degree and suppose that the probability that this node receives a verified message along each of the edges is . Then, the independence assumption implies that the number of verified messages that this node receives has a binomial distribution. One should note that the independence assumption here is different from the sim-

To find the probability

,

, we need the condi-

tional probability that an edge connecting a check node in the set

,

, and an unverified variable node, carries

a verified message to the check node in the first half-round of

iteration . We denote this conditional probability by . As-

suming this probability is known, for

and

,

we have

ilar assumption made for the density evolution analysis of MB

algorithms. The latter requires the extrinsic nature of message

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6637

The probability

can be computed as (In the following,

is the status bit of the message sent from to over the edge

, and is defined as the probability of an edge

being adjacent to a check node

conditioned on the

fact that it is adjacent to a variable node

.)

Fig. 14. Variable node in moves to .

adjacent check node has a degree equal to 1, i.e.,

.

The probability is calculated as follows:

where can be calculated as

(6)

(3) where

is given in (4).

In the Genie algorithm, the probability of a variable node in

the set being verified is calculated as

. There-

fore, the probability of a variable node remaining unverified,

i.e.,

, is

(4)

2) Derivation of Update Equations for HR2 of Iteration

,

(Calculation of

and

): In the second

half-round, variable nodes receive messages from their neigh-

boring check nodes. According to the verification rule in the

Genie algorithm, the only unverified variable nodes are those

in the set

. Variable nodes in this set have no connec-

tion to check nodes in the set

but connections

to the sets

. Suppose

.

In this case, if out of adjacent check nodes of in

move to

, will move from

to

. This is shown in Fig. 14.

We define the probability

as the probability of a vari-

able node

moving to

. We thus have

3) Initial Probabilities for the Genie Algorithm (

and

): Assuming an initial density factor of ,

fraction of the edges from variable nodes in the first iteration

carry a recovery message to check nodes. Since at iteration zero

no variable node in the support set is verified, we have

. Moreover,

and

. The set of

probabilities

is thus given by the following:

To find the probability

, we first find the probability

from (6) and then replace it in (5).

C. LM:

1) Iteration Zero, R1 (Verification of Variable Nodes Based (5) on D1CN): In R1-HR1, each check node sends its degree (equal

to ) and its received measurement to all its neighboring vari-

where is defined as the probability that an edge adjacent to a able nodes. In R1-HR2, variable nodes receive such messages.

variable node

carries a message indicating that the Since the verification of (nonzero) variable nodes at this stage is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6638

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

based solely on D1CN, no variable node is verified at this stage.

Therefore, we have

, and hence

2) Iteration Zero, R2 (verification of Variable Nodes Based on ZCN): Since no variable node was verified in R1-HR2, the messages sent from check nodes to variable nodes in R2-HR1 are the same as those sent in R1-HR1. All check nodes at this stage have degree in the subgraph induced by the unverified variable nodes. Thus, the set of all check nodes can be parti-

tioned into subsets

, where ,

, denotes

the -degree of the check node. The edges adjacent to a check

node are also partitioned into two sets: -edges and -edges.

-edges are connected to variable nodes in the support set,

while -edges are connected to zero-valued variable nodes.

Therefore, a check node in the set

has , -edges and

, -edges.

In R2-HR2, variable nodes process their incoming messages.

At this stage, a variable node is verified based on the ZCN rule,

if it receives at least one message with a value equal to zero.

Let ,

, denote the set of check nodes with

-degree equal to . The probability defined as the proba-

bility that a check node belongs to the set follows:

is calculated as

3) Iteration One, R1-HR1 (Regrouping of Check Nodes in

Sets Based on the Index ): Based on the recovery process

at iteration zero, all verified variable nodes are in the sets ,

. The processing of verified messages sent from

these variable nodes to check nodes at iteration 1, R1-HR1 re-

sults in some check nodes to move from

to

,

,

. The set of such check nodes is de-

noted by

and we are interested in the probability that

a check node belongs to this set.

Let

denote the probability of an edge in the set of

-edges carrying a verified message. Such edges are not con-

nected to the set . Let and denote the variable node

and the check node connected by edge . We thus have

where and over, for

are given in (9) and (8), respectively. Moreand

Hence

Hence, the probability that a check node has a value equal to

zero

is

Let

denote the set of zero-valued variable nodes that

receive zero-valued messages. The probability

de-

fined as the probability that a zero-valued variable node belongs

to the set

is calculated as follows:

(7)

where is the probability that an edge adjacent to a zero-

valued variable node is also connected to a check node with

value equal to zero. This happens if the other

variable

nodes adjacent to the check node are all zero-valued. Therefore,

is calculated as follows:

(10)

4) Iteration One, R1-HR2 (Verification of Variable Nodes

Based on D1CN): In R1-HR2, received messages from check

nodes are processed at variable nodes. At this stage, a check

node in the set

transmits a message with its first co-

ordinate equal to 1, making it possible for variable nodes in the

support set to be verified according to D1CN rule. We parti-

tion the set of all variable nodes in into subsets

,

, where denotes the number of received messages

with the first coordinate equal to 1 (refer to Fig. 4(a) for more in-

formation). We denote the set of such variable nodes by

.

Let

denote the probability that an edge adjacent to a vari-

able node in the support set carries a message with the first co-

ordinate equal to 1. Using the same notations and defined

above, we have

(8)

Let

denote the probability that a variable

node has a zero value but is not verified in R2-HR2 of iteration Hence, the probability

,

zero. Based on (7) and (8), we have

belongs to the set

(11)
, that a variable node is calculated as follows:

(9)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(12)

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6639

Based on the D1CN rule in the LM algorithm, variable nodes

in the set

are verified. Therefore, the probability

that a variable node in the support set remains unverified for

iteration 2 is as follows:

edge adjacent to a zero-valued variable node carries a message with value zero. This probability is calculated as follows:

5) Iteration One, R2-HR1 (Regrouping of Check Nodes in

Sets Based on the Index ): Since some variable nodes in

the support set have been verified in R1-HR2, a check node in

the set

might move into the set

in R2-HR1.

This happens if from edges in the set of -edges adjacent to

the check node, of them carry a verified message. The set of

such check nodes are denoted by

and we are interested

in the probability that a check node belongs to this set.

(13)

Let

denote the probability that a -edge carries a ver-

ified message. We have

We then, for

, have

Finally, the probability that a variable node is zero-valued and remains unverified for iteration 2 is calculated by

where

and

are given by (12) and (11), respec-

tively. Hence, the probability

,

,

,

, that a check node belongs to the set

is

calculated as follows:

7) Iteration Two and Beyond: The analysis of the second iteration and beyond is similar to that of iteration one, and hence omitted. The summary of the formulas can be found in Section V-D, Table VIII.

D. SBB:

Note that we have

and

. After the In this section, we adopt the notation , with any superscript,

regrouping, the probability

,

, that a check node belongs to the set

,

to denote the set

.

is calculated by

1) Iteration Zero: The analysis for iteration zero is the same as that of the LM algorithm discussed in Part C-1 of the

Appendix, and is thus not repeated here.

2) Iteration One, R1-HR1 (Regrouping of Check Nodes in

Sets Based on the Index ): The analysis of R1-HR1 for

SBB and LM are the same. (See Part C-3 of the Appendix.)

3) Iteration One, R1-HR2 (Verification of Variable Nodes

6) Iteration One, R2-HR2 (Verification of Variable Nodes Based on D1CN and ECN): In R1-HR2, the variable nodes in

Based on ZCN): The measurement corresponding to check the support set are verified based on D1CN and ECN rules.

nodes in the set

,

, changes to zero, as Therefore, based on received messages from check nodes, we

such check nodes are no longer connected to unverified variable partition the support set into subsets

,

,

nodes in the support set. Hence, the messages transmitted by where denotes the number of neighboring check nodes in the

such check nodes have their second coordinate equal to zero, set

(refer to Fig. 4(b) for more information). We de-

which in turn verifies some variable nodes (in the set ) at note the set of such variable nodes by

. This set shall

R2-HR2 of iteration 1.

serve as an intermediate set that reflects the processing of mes-

To find the probability that a zero-valued variable node is sages from check nodes but does not reflect the verification of

verified at this stage, we need the probability

that an support set elements.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6640

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

Let

denote the conditional probability that an edge The normalization factor

is used to make the set of pa-

is adjacent to a check node in the set

given that it is rameters

a valid probability measure, and is calculated

adjacent to a variable node in the support set. We then have

as follows:

(14) Hence, we have

(15)

Based on the ECN rule, variable nodes in the set

are verified. A fraction

of variable nodes in the set

that receive a message with the first coordinate equal

to 1 are also verified based on the D1CN rule. This fraction is

equal to

By omitting the superscripts for simplicity, and noting , we have

4) Iteration One, R2-HR1 (Regrouping of Check Nodes in

Sets Based on the Index ): At this point, since some vari-

able nodes in the support set have been verified at R1-HR2,

check nodes should be regrouped based on their -degree. Since

the variable nodes in the set

are left unverified, not all

check nodes in the set

are moved

into the set

; some will stay in the same set

.

Hence, in addition to analyzing the set of check nodes

that are moved from

to

, we also have to

analyze the set of check nodes

that are moved from

to

.

We partition the edges adjacent to a check node into two

sets: -edges and -edges. -edges are connected to variable

nodes in the set , while -edges are connected to unveri-

fied zero-valued variable nodes. To analyze the regrouping of

check nodes in the sets

and

,

,

we need the probabilities

and

defined as follows.

The probability

is the conditional probability of an edge

carrying a verified message given that it is a -edge adjacent

to a check node in the set

. The probability

is defined similarly with respect to the set of check nodes in

.

Since the verified messages involved in the calculation of

originate from the set

, we have

Therefore, the probability that a variable node in the support set remains unverified for iteration 2 is calculated as follows:

Correspondingly, the unverified nonzero variable nodes are partitioned based on the following probabilities:

where

and

tively. Similarly,

are given by (15) and (14), respecis derived as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6641

5) Iteration One, R2-HR2 (Verification of Variable Nodes

Based on ZCN): Let

denote the probability that an un-

verified zero-valued variable node is verified at this stage. This

probability is derived similar to (13) and is given by

(16)

Fig. 15. Relationship between the sets , on the left, and the sets

, and

, , on the right.

Hence, the set of probabilities

,

,

,

, that a check node belongs to the set of check

nodes

are calculated as follows:

Hence, the probability

,

, defined as the

probability that an unverified zero-valued variable node belongs

to the set

, is calculated as follows:

Finally, the probability that a variable node is zero-valued and remains unverified for iteration 2 is given by

6) Iteration Two, R1-HR1 (Regrouping of Check Nodes in

Based on the Index ): Similar to the analysis of R1-HR1

at iteration 1, for

,

,

, we

have

Consequently, the probability

,

, that a check node belongs to the set lated as follows:

,

where

is calcu-

Hence, for

For the analysis in Part D-7 of the Appendix, we need

to partition the set of check nodes in

into two

sets:

and

. Check nodes in the set

were moved into the set

from all the

other sets

,

. Check nodes in the set

, however, are those that stayed in the set from

. Fig. 15 shows the relationship between the sets.

Let

and

denote the probabilities that

a check node belongs to the sets respectively. We have

and

,

7) Iteration Two, R1-HR2 (Verification of Variable Nodes Based on D1CN and ECN): Edges emanating from the set
, are responsible for the re-

grouping of variable nodes at iteration 2, R1-HR2. Let

be the conditional probability that an edge is adjacent to a

check node in

given that 1) it emanates from an

unverified nonzero variable node, and 2) it is not adjacent to a

check node in the set

. This

is indeed the probability that a variable node has an edge that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6642

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

increases its index. This probability is calculated as follows Finally, for the set of probabilities :

, we have

The two probabilities in the numerator are equal to

and

, respectively. The denominator can be further processed as

The normalization factor

is calculated by

We thus have

The probability that a variable node in remains unverified after iteration 2 is calculated as follows:

where

Hence, the probability

,

from

is moved into

lated as follows:

, that a variable node

,

, is calcu-

8) Iteration Two, R2-HR1 (Regrouping of Check Nodes

in Sets Based on the Index ): We derive the probability

, defined in Part D-4 of the Appendix, in (18) at the

bottom of the next page. In the derivation, we use the nota-

tion

(or

) to denote a verified (or unverified)

message passing over edge from a variable node to a check

node. (For simplicity, some superscripts are omitted. They ap-

pear when there is a risk of ambiguity.) In this equation,

is given by

(17)

Finally, the probability

is calculated by

Hence, the probability

,

,

,

, is calculated as follows:

The probability

that a variable node in the support set

belongs to the set

, is calculated based on the set of

verified variable nodes at this stage. Variable nodes in the set

,

, are all verified. Variable nodes in the

set

are all left unverified, and a fraction of the variable

nodes in the set

are verified. The set

consists

of two sets of variable nodes:

and

. A variable

node in

has a neighbor in

, while a variable

node in

has a neighbor in

. Variable nodes

in the two sets

and

are verified if and only if

they are neighbor to check nodes in the sets

and

, respectively. Let

and

be the

The evolution of sets

and

is a bit more in-

volved. Let a check node

. Suppose, is neighbor

to a variable node

. Variable node is verified

if and only if belongs to the subset

. Hence,

moves to the set of zero-valued check nodes if it belongs to the

set

. Now, suppose is neighbor to a variable node

, or

. Since the variable

node is verified with probability 1, check node becomes a

zero-valued check node with probability 1 as well. A similar

argument holds true for the set of check nodes in

and variable nodes in

. Therefore, we need to further

probabilities that a variable node in

and

ified at iteration 2, R1-HR2, respectively. We have

is ver- divide check nodes in the sets

and

based

on whether or not they are neighbor to variable nodes in the sets

and

, respectively.

We partition the set

into subsets

and

. The set

consists of check nodes with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6643

and

, respectively. Probabilities

and

are defined similarly. The calculation of the proba-

bility

,

, follows in (19) at the top of

the next page, where [using (17)]

and

Fig. 16. Graphical description of sets

,

,

,

, and .

a neighboring variable node in

. The rest of the check

nodes in

are all collected in the set

.

Similarly, the set

is partitioned into subsets

and

, where

consists of

check nodes with a neighboring variable node in

. The

rest of the check nodes in

are collected in the set

. Fig. 16 depicts the relationship between the sets.

Let

and

, for

, denote

the probabilities that a check node belongs to sets

Also Following a similar approach, we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(18)

6644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2012

(19)

All check nodes in the sets

,

, also like to thank the Associate Editor and the anonymous re-

, and

are moved into the set

viewers for their helpful comments, which improved the content

after R2-HR1. On the other hand, check nodes in the sets and the presentation of the paper.

the sets

, and

,

, are moved into

. Consequently, we have

9) Iteration Two, R2-HR2 (Verification of Variable Nodes

Based on ZCN): At this stage, the probability

,

, is calculated as follows:

where

is given by (16) with the appropriate change of

probabilities to reflect the values corresponding to iteration 2.

Finally, the probability that a variable node is zero-valued and

remains unverified for iteration 3 is given by

10) Iterations Three and Beyond: The analysis of an iter-

ation ,

, is similar to that of iteration 2. The summary of

update equations for SBB is given in Section V-D (see Table X).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank H. D. Pfister for providing them with the latest version of [23]. Also, the simulations in this work were made possible by the facilities of the Shared Hierarchical Academic Research Computing Network (SHARCNET:www. sharcnet.ca) and Compute/Calcul Canada. The authors would

REFERENCES
[1] D. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[2] E. Candès, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Robust uncertainty principles: Exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 489–509, Feb. 2006.
[3] W. Xu and B. Hassibi, “Efficient compressive sensing with deterministic guarantees using expander graphs,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Workshop, Sep. 2007, pp. 414–419.
[4] Y. Wu and S. Verdú, “Fundamental limits of almost lossless analog compression,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2009, pp. 359–363.
[5] R. G. Baraniuk, “Compressive sensing,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 118–124, Jul. 2007.
[6] J. Tropp, “Topics in sparse approximation,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Texas, Austin, 2004.
[7] R. Berinde, A. Gilbert, P. Indyk, and K. Strauss, “Combining geometry and combinatorics: A unified approach to sparse signal recovery,” in Proc. 46th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Sep. 2008, pp. 798–805.
[8] J. Tropp and A. Gilbert, “Signal recovery from random measurements via orthogonal matching pursuit,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4655–4666, Dec. 2007.
[9] D. Needell and R. Vershynin, “Uniform uncertainty principle and signal recovery via regularized orthogonal matching pursuit,” Found. Comput. Math., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 317–334, Jun. 2009.
[10] S. Mendelson, A. Pajor, and N. Tomczak-Jaegermann, “Uniform uncertainty principle for bernoulli and sub-Gaussian ensembles,” Constructive Approx., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 277–289, Dec. 2008.
[11] R. Baraniuk, M. Davenport, R. DeVore, and M. Wakin, “A simple proof of the restricted isometry property for random matrices,” Constructive Approx., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 253–263, Dec. 2008.
[12] E. Candès and T. Tao, “Decoding by linear programming,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 4203–4215, Dec. 2005.
[13] V. Chandar, “A negative result concerning explicit matrices with the restricted isometry property,” Preprint, Mar. 2008.
[14] G. Cormode and M. Muthukrishnan, “Combinatorial algorithms for compressed sensing,” in Proc. Struct. Inf. Commun. Complexity, 2006, pp. 280–294.
[15] P. Indyk, “Explicit constructions for compressed sensing of sparse signals,” in Proc. Symp. Discrete Algorithms, 2008, pp. 30–33.
[16] A. C. Gilbert, M. J. Strauss, J. A. Tropp, and R. Vershynin, “Algorithmic linear dimension reduction in the norm for sparse vectors,” presented at the 44th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., 2006.
[17] A. C. Gilbert, M. J. Strauss, J. A. Tropp, and R. Vershynin, “One sketch for all: Fast algorithms for compressed sensing,” in Proc. 39th ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 2007, pp. 237–246.
[18] S. Sarvotham, D. Baron, and R. Baraniuk, “Sudocodes—Fast measurement and reconstruction of sparse signals,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2006, pp. 2804–2808.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EFTEKHARI et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF NODE-BASED VERIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHMS

6645

[19] V. Chandar, D. Shah, and G. W. Wornell, “A simple message-passing algorithm for compressed sensing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2010, pp. 1968–1972.
[20] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, On the iterative decoding of high rate LDPC codes with applications in compressed sensing [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0903.2232
[21] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, “Compressed sensing and linear codes over real numbers,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, Feb. 2008, pp. 558–561.
[22] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, “List-message passing achieves capacity on the q-ary symmetric channel for large q,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2007, pp. 283–287.
[23] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, “Analysis of verification-based decoding on the q-ary symmetric channel for large q,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 6754–6770, Oct. 2011.
[24] Y. Lu, A. Montanari, B. Prabhakar, S. Dharmapurikar, and A. Kabbani, “Counter braids: A novel counter architecture for per-flow measurement,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Meas. Modeling Comput. Syst., Jun. 2008, pp. 121–132.
[25] M. Akcakaya, J. Park, and V. Tarokh, “Low density frames for compressive sensing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., Mar. 2010, pp. 3642–3645.
[26] D. Baron, S. Savotham, and R. G. Baraniuk, “Bayesian compressive sensing via belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 269–280, Jan. 2010.
[27] A. Montanari and D. Tse, “Analysis of belief propagation for nonlinear problems: The example of CDMA (or: How to prove Tanaka’s formula),” in Proc. Inf. Theory Workshop, Mar. 2006, pp. 160–164.
[28] D. Guo and C.-C. Wang, “Multiuser detection of sparsely spread cdma,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 421–431, Apr. 2008.
[29] D. Guo, D. Baron, and S. Shamai, “A single-letter characterization of optimal noisy compressed sensing,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2009, pp. 52–59.
[30] C. P. Robert, The Bayesian Choise: A Decision Theoretic Motivation. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1994.
[31] C. C. Paige and M. A. Saunders, “Lsqr: Sparse linear equations and least squares problems,” ACM Trans. Math. Softw., vol. 8, pp. 195–209, Jun. 1982.
[32] M. Luby and M. Mitzenmacher, “Verification-based decoding for packet-based low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 120–127, Jan. 2005.
[33] Y. Lu, A. Montanari, and B. Prabhakar, “Counter braids: Asymptotic optimality of the message passing decoding algorithm,” in Proc. 46th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Sep. 2008, pp. 209–216.
[34] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[35] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[36] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[37] D. J. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[38] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[39] Y. Eftekhari, A. Heidarzadeh, A. H. Banihashemi, and I. Lambadaris, Density evolution analysis of node-based verification-based algorithms in compressed sensing Carleton Univ., Ottawa, ON, Canada, Tech. Rep. SCE-11-07, 2011.
[40] E. Candès, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Stable signal recovery from incomplete and inaccurate measurements,” Commun. Pure Math., vol. 59, pp. 1207–1223, Aug. 2006.
[41] M. Bayati and A. Montanari, “The dynamics of message passing on dense graphs, with applications to compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 764–785, Feb. 2011.

[42] H. L. V. Trees, Detection, Estimation, and Modulation Theory, Part I. New York: Wiley, 2001.
[43] [Online]. Available: http://www.acm.caltech.edu/l1magic/ [44] E. Candès, M. Wakin, and S. Boyd, “Enhancing sparsity by reweighted
l1 minimization,” The J. Fourier Anal. Appl., vol. 14, no. 5–6, pp. 877–905, Dec. 2008. [45] D. Donoho and J. Tanner, “Thresholds for the recovery of sparse solutions via l1 minimization,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Mar. 2006, pp. 202–206.
Yaser Eftekhari (S’07) received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering with a major in telecommunication from Isfahan University of Technology, Esfahan, Iran, in 2002 and 2004, respectively.
He is a Ph.D. candidate in electrical and computer engineering at the Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada. He is currently with Irdeto Canada through MITACS Accelerate Internship.
His research interests include compressed sensing, cryptography and computer networks.
Anoosheh Heidarzadeh (S’08) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran, in 2005, and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering -communication systems- from University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2007. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at the Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
His research interests include network coding theory, network information theory, compressed sensing, and rateless codes.
Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. During 1994–1997, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, for his Ph.D. degree. He held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students during this period. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he worked as a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University in 1998, where at present he is a Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communications algorithms, and compressive sensing and sampling. He has published more than 150 papers in refereed journals and conferences.
Dr. Banihashemi served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009. He is the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University.
He has been involved in many international conferences as chair, member of technical program committee, and member of organizing committee. These include co-chair for the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom’07, TPC co-chair of the Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, member of the organizing committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and co-chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. Dr. Banihashemi is a recipient of Carleton’s Research Achievement Award in 2006 and 2012, and Faculty Graduate Mentoring Award in 2011. He is also awarded one of the NSERC’s one hundred 2008 Discovery Accelerator Supplements (DAS).
Ioannis Lambadaris, biography not available at the time of publication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:34:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

