ISITA2012, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, October 28-31, 2012

An Improvement of Insertion/Deletion/Substitution Error Correction Capabilities of LDPC codes Using
Slide Decoding

Tooru Shigehiro Tokyo University of Science 1-14-6 Kudankita,Chiyoda-Ku
Tokyo,Japan Email: shigehiro@sec.ee.kagu.tus.ac.jp

Hirohisa Yabe Tokyo University of Science 1-14-6 Kudankita,Chiyoda-Ku
Tokyo,Japan Email: yabe@sec.ee.kagu.tus.ac.jp

Keiichi Iwamura Tokyo University of Science 1-14-6 Kudankita,Chiyoda-Ku
Tokyo,Japan Email: iwamura@ee.kagu.tus.ac.jp

Abstract—This study investigates insertion, deletion, and substitution error correcting codes constructed with lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes. The studies for insertion/deletion/substitution error correcting codes are few comparing with substitution error correcting codes. We improve insertion/deletion/substitution error correction capabilities of LDPC codes using slide decoding for modified check matrix. Our evaluation shows that the block error rate of the proposed method is lower than that of the conventional method using marker codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
In the present communications system, application of error correcting codes are indispensable. Usually in error correcting codes , it is assumed that the code length does not change at the receiving and transmitting sides. However, this assumption may not always be true, depending on the channel. That is, when a bit is inserted or deleted, there may be errors in code synchronization due to changes in code length and the starting point of the code. In this paper, the error caused by bit substitution is called a substitution error and that caused by bit deletion/insertion is called a synchronization error.
There are some studies [1][2][3] to correct synchronization and substitution errors. However, the studies for synchronization and substitution error correcting codes are very few comparing with substitution error correcting codes. In recent years, studies that watermark codes [5], and marker codes [6] using low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [4], have been reported for syncronization and substitution error correction. However, the correction capabilities of these codes are not enough. In this paper, a new synchronization and substitution error correcting code which can realize better correction capability than the conventional codes is proposed.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the channel model is described. Section III shows marker codes as the conventional codes. Section IV presents the construction method and the decoding of the proposed code, and Section V shows the results and evaluation of comparative experiments. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.

Fig. 1. IDS channel model
II. CHANNEL MODEL
In this paper, the positions of a bit series are random, and a channel that is generated by substitution and synchronization errors without correlation is assumed. This channel is referred to as an insertion/deletion/substitution (IDS) channel. The flow chart of an IDS channel model is shown in Figure 1.
It can be assumed that an IDS channel follows the hidden Markov model [7]. The state . . . , i − 1, i, i + 1, . . . in Figure 1 is expressed as a hidden state. The state i expresses the state of being ready to process the i − 1 -th bit ti−1 and telling the i -th bit ti. Considering the time of a state i, one of the following three events occur.
1) A random bit is transmitted with probability pins, and it returns to a state i.
2) The i -th bit ti is deleted with probability pdel, and it moves to the state i + 1.
3) The i -th bit ti is transmitted with probability pt = 1 − pins − pdel, and it moves to the state i + 1. However, the bit ti causes bit inversion with probability pflip.
In the above-mentioned operation,repeated until all of the transmission bit sequence t to be sent. Obtained sequence is received sequence.

Copyright 2012 IEICE

216

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:28:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the considered concatenated encoding and decoding scheme using marker codes

Fig. 3. Representation example of trellis diagram

III. MARKER CODES

A. Construction Method

A regular marker is inserted into The bit sequence to be transmitted. For example, the marker ”001” are inserted between every four data bits:
011011001010 ⇒ 0110 001 1100 001 1010 The decoder can then search for markers and use shift in marker position to deduce bit loss or gain. The coding system is shown in Figure 2.
B. Probabilistic Resynchronization
We use the forward-backward algorithm [9] to find the conditional probability distribution of the transmitted bits given the received bits. Figure 3 shows a representation of synchronization errors. The solid line indicates one particular sequence of insertions and deletions which then defines a mapping from transmitted to received bits. If there were no insertions or deletions, the mapping would follow the dashed line. This represents a one-to-one mapping between the received and transmitted bits. To enable the mapping to correspond to the three operations of the channel,three different types of moves are possible on the grid, as illustrated in Figure 4.
1) Normal transmission (possibly including a bit flip) A diagonal move in which the top left-hand end of the move lies on the intersection between the row and column corresponding to the transmitted and received bits respectively.
2) Insertion This corresponds to a horizontal move in which an extra random bit appears in the received sequence at the left hand end of the move.
3) Deletion This is a vertical move such that the transmitted bit corresponding to the top of the move does not have a position in the received sequence.
We assume prior probabilities, gj = P r(tj = 1), on each transmitted bit, tj. The probability of a particular path and received data set r is:

Fig. 4. Representation of normal send and synchronization error occurrence

P r(path, r|g) = P r(path|g) ∗ P r(r|path, g)

=

Pins

Pdel

(1 − Pins − Pdel)

insertions

deletions

normal

1 2

k(ri, gi) (1)

insertions normal

where

⎧ ⎨⎪⎪Pf lip

k(ri,

gi)

=

1− ⎪⎪⎩1/2

Pf

lip

(2)

The probability of a transmitted digit being flipped is pflip. The probability of a path is given by the product of the probabilities for each insertion (pins), deletion (pdel) and normal transmission (1 − pins − pdel). The probability of the received data ri when a bit is inserted is 1/2 for ri = 0or1. Deletions do not give any received data and hence do not contribute to the probability of r. For each normal transmission the contribution to the probability of the received data is one of the three terms of Eq.(2):
· pflip(the probability of a transmitted digit being flipped) This is chosen when the transmitted digit is known and the received digit does not match it.
· 1-pflip When the received digit matches the known transmitted bit.
· 1/2 This is chosen when the transmitted digit is not known assuming a 50:50 input distribution.

When decoding we do not know the path followed or user data. To infer user data given the received data r, we marginalize across all paths using the forward-backward algorithm.
We define a forward probability at a position (i, j), Pf (i, j), to be the probability that the alignment passes through (i, j),

217
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:28:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5. Recursive evaluation of forward probabilities

probability of a transmitted sequence can be calculated more accurately. In addition, the information sequence used in the proposed method will be described as all zeros as well as using the conventional method.
A. Construction Method of Check Matrix
For any codeword c in binary code C of code length n, the following relationship holds for the parity check matrix H of the m × n.

and the received data up to time (i − 1) is r1...ri−1. There are only three ways by which the path can reach (i, j). It
can arrive by a horizontal, vertical, or diagonal move from an adjacent space, as shown in Figure 5. Therefore, Pf (i, j) can be found recursively:

Pf

(i,

j)

=

Pins

1 2

Pf

(i

−

1,

j)

+

PdeiPf

(i,

j

−

1)

+

(1 − Pins − Pdei)k(ri−1, gi−1)Pf (i − 1, j − 1)

(3)

k(ri−1, gi−1) is obtained by comparing the received bit ri−1 and transmitted bit tj−1.
Assuming that the synchronization error is initially zero, the
boundary conditions are Pf (0, 0) = 1, and Pf (i, j) = 0 for all points not on the grid.
Similarly, we define the backward probability, Pb(i, j) to be the conditional probability of the received data from time i onward, ri...rN , given that the alignment passes through (i, j).

Pb(i,

j)

=

Pins

1 2

Pb(i

+

1,

j)

+

PdeiPb(i,

j

+

1)

+

(1 − Pins − Pdei)k(ri+1, gi+1)Pb(i + 1, j + 1)

(4)

The backward message-passing algorithm that is used for computing Pb(i, j) is similar to the forward algorithm mentioned above. The boundary conditions are Pb(i, j) = 0 for (i, j) not on the grid, and Pb(N, i) = 1 for all rows i, where N is the last column of received data. The forward and backward messages pf and pb are used to infer the posterior probability of each user bit, P r(tj|r), by marginalizing over the diagonal and vertical edges in column j.
The log-likelihood ratio is determined from this posterior
probability and information sources in order to estimate the
log domain sum-product decoding algorithm [4].

IV. THE PROPOSED METHOD
Marker codes of the conventional method can be given certain information prior probability of marker bits.(0 or 1) Other bits are given gj = 1/2.
The difference from the conventional method is that it is possible to calculate the prior probability of bits other than the marker by a new decoding method that is configured to form a special parity check matrix. Therefore, the posterior

cHT = 0

(5)

Moreover, for the received word y

s = (s1, s2, · · · sm) = yHT

(6)

Let the m-dimensional vector s be a syndrome. Each element of this syndrome, a parity check matrix:

⎛

⎞

h11 h12 · · · h1n

H = ⎜⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜

h21 ...

h22 ...

··· ...

h2n ...

⎟⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟

(7)

hm1 hm2 · · · hmn

then

si = hi1c1 + hi2c2 + · · · + hincn1 (i = 1, . . . , m) (8)
A specific interval that is not affected by synchronization errors in bit sequences should exactly match the specific interval of the codeword. For example;

hi1 = hi2 = hi3 = 1, hi4 = · · · = hin = 0

(9)

If there is not an error with c1c2c3, the syndrome will be 0. That is, it is possible to detect hte interval of error does not affect. Using this feature, the check matrix is configured as shown in Figure 6.
It is configured so that the step-like region containing ”1” is on the top of the parity check matrix. This area must not overlap in any row. When configured as shown in Figure 6, the step-like area will be addressed in the interval of a one-toone codeword. When this configuration was used to detect a specific code a synchronization error did not occur. This stairstep configuration is used for the detection of interval that synchronization error did not occur.
Figure 6 shows an example of a parity check matrix with a column weight of 3, and a row weight of 6. (α is the portrait of each area of the stair-step, β is the landscape, k is the total number of stair-steps, and the code length is n = βk.)

218
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:28:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 6. Check matrix(α =1,β =6) of (3,6) LDPC codes

B. Decoding Method
First, we perform decoding to calculate the reliability (the prior probability gj) of a bit of the transmission sequence t using the parity check matrix structure from the received sequence r. Then, we find the posterior probability using the forward-backward algorithm obtained from the prior probability, in order to completely correct the error caused by the log domain sum-product decoding algorithm. The forwardbackward algorithm is performed once from computational point of view. Slide decoding is used for the parity check matrix as described in formula (7). In addition, this parity check matrix is also used for the decoding of LDPC codes. Next, we further explain slide decoding.

Fig. 7. Operation example of slide decoding
only if the index of (aβ + 1, aβ + 2, · · · , (a + 1)β) is present in y. Then, a is an arbitrary integer.

1) Slide Decoding: Slide decoding is a method used to find the prior probability gj of the marker outside the transmission sequence. To do this, the syndrome is calculated by multiplying the received sequence by the parity check matrix. In this case, it is necessary to consider temporarily removing the marker bit from the received sequence for decoding using the parity check matrix. Let the block be the area of the staircase at the top of the check matrix, and it can be separated so that the code word corresponds to the block. If no error occurs in an interval of this separated codeword, the ”gap” that the syndrome is zero exists by multiplying the check matrix through shifting the received sequence.
Next, we explain the decoding process in detail. When the sequence length of the received sequence r is L, the index of each bit is r1r2r3 · · · rL. The index is assigned so that the order of the first bit is also a transmitted sequence. Then, the index of the marker position is determined. Here, the parity check matrix is expressed in formula (7).

c) If all syndromes of the number of a are zero, the corresponding temporarily received word is recorded. To updated yci,0 = yci,0 + 1 if yi = 0, yci,1 = yci,1 + 1 if yi = 1. yci,0, yci,1 are counters of the temporarily received word, and the initial
condition is 0.

In the above operation, the ”gap” x is shown in the case of 0. When x is non-zero, all indices of r are added to x. The test ”gap” is set to l in decoding, and the above operation is repeated with the range −l < x < l. Finally, the prior probability gj of the outside marker from the bit of the recorded received word is evaluated.

⎧ ⎨⎪⎪P,

if yci,0 > yci,1

gj

=

1 − P, ⎪⎪⎩1/2,

if yci,0 < yci,1 otherwise

(10)

a) The received sequence is removed so that the bits of Here, reliability P is a set value. Since the information the index do not apply to the transmitted sequence, sequence can be evaluated without the marker when the and the bits are used as an index of the marker. The prior probability is evaluated by slide decoding, perform the index is assigned as a standard for the minimum synchronization. Subsequent to decoding, the procedure is the value of the index of the other received sequence. same as the conventional method. ”gap” l is shown how to The resulting bit sequence is the temporarily received calculate.
word.(cf. Figure 7)

l = 10 mclengh ∗ pdel/(1 − pdel)

(11)

b) The syndrome is calculated by multiplying the block Here, mclength stands for the code length in the marker divisions of y and H. In other words, we calculate the insert. Formula (11) denotes that ”gap” increases with deletion corresponding syndrome (saα+1, saα+2, · · · , saα+α) error rate.

219
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:28:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 8. Decoding characteristic (pflip=0)

Fig. 10. Decoding characteristic (pflip=0.01)

Fig. 9. Decoding characteristic (pflip=0.005)

insertion/deletion/substitution error rate is varied, the proposed method has a superior decoding performance than the conventional method.
The reliability P is a set value, but if we can calculate the theoretical P given a more accurate prior probability, we could be improve the error correction capability of codes. The proposed error correcting code has a potential application in watermarking. Error correcting codes have been used as mandatory technology in digital watermarking however, simultaneous corrections of substitution errors are required because in certain cases, there is a ”gap” in content that is cut and pasted. We consider that the application of the proposed method could solve this problem.

V. EVALUATION
Now, we evaluate block error rate (BER) with the proposed and conventional methods through simulations. In the simulation to evaluate the information sequence as all zeros. We adopt regular LDPC codes (code lengths:360,540,720 and row weight: 6 ,column weight: 3), and set the maximum number of sum-product decoding algorithms at 100. The stair-step block of the parity check matrix in the proposed method set column (α,β) is (1,6). (row weight: 6, column weight: 1) Insertion and deletion error rates are pins = pdel. We set the reliability P = 0.45, and insertion marker ”111”,”101” at intervals of 10 bits. The simulation results are shown in Figures 8, 9, and 10.
From the simulation results, the decoding performance of the proposed method is superior to that of the conventional method because BER is low. Although the figure has been omitted, the results of the marker ”101” as well. By the addition of slide decoding, the computational complexity of time is increased by an average of 34% compared with that of the conventional method. However, there is a trade-off relationship because BER decreased by an average of 46%.

REFERENCES
[1] S.W. Golomb, B. Gordon, and L.R. Welch, Commafree codes, Can. J. Math., vol.38, no.2, pp.202-209, 1958.
[2] Hatsukaza Tanaka, Systematic Construction Algorithm of Fixed BlockLength(d,k)Codes, IEICE(A),J76-A, 8, pp.1224-1233 (1993-08).
[3] V.I. Levenshtein, Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals, Soviet Physics-Doklady, vol.10, no.8, pp.707-710, Feb. 1962.
[4] Robert G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, in Research Monograph serics, Cambridge, MIT Press,1963.
[5] Matthew C.Davey and David J.C. MacKay. Reliable communication over channels with insertions, deletions, and substitutions, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 47(2):687-698, February 2001.
[6] Edward A. Raezer. Marker codes for channels with insertions and deletions, Annals of Telecommunications, 60:1-2, p. 29-44, JanuaryFebruary 2005.
[7] E.Alpaydin, Introduction to Machine Learning, The MIT Press, 2004. [8] Edward A. Raezer and Daved J.C. MacKay. Codes for channels with
insertions, deletions and substitutions, In 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, 2000. [9] Richard Durbin, Sean R. Eddy, Anders Krogh, and Graeme Mitchison. Biological sequence analysis: probabilistic models of proteins and nucleic acids, Cambridge University Press, 1998. [10] Hideki Imai. Coding theory,IEICE, 1990. [11] Tadasi Watayama. LDPC codes and the decoding, Triceps, 2002. [12] Tadasi Watayama. Lelease program of LDPC codes, http://dl.dropbox.com/u/1820240/supportpages/LDPCpublic.html

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new synchronization error correcting code with a superior decoding performance compared with the conventional method. This was done by including a decoding process (slide decoding). Even if the

220
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:28:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

