1366
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014
Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoders for LDPC Codes:
Optimization, Architecture and Analysis
Fang Cai, Student Member, IEEE, Xinmiao Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, David Declercq, Senior Member, IEEE,
Shiva Kumar Planjery, and Bane Vasić, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are adopted
in many applications due to their Shannon-limit approaching
error-correcting performance. Nevertheless, belief-propagation
(BP) based decoding of these codes suffers from the error-floor
problem, i.e., an abrupt change in the slope of the error-rate
curve that occurs at very low error rates. Recently, a new type of
decoders termed finite alphabet iterative decoders (FAIDs) were
introduced. The FAIDs use simple Boolean maps for variable
node processing, and can surpass the BP-based decoders in the
error floor region with very short word length. We restrict the
scope of this paper to regular
LDPC codes on the BSC
channel. This paper develops a low-complexity implementation
architecture for the FAIDs by making use of their properties.
Particularly, an innovative bit-serial check node unit is designed
for the FAIDs, and a small-area variable node unit is proposed
by exploiting the symmetry in the Boolean maps. Moreover, an
optimized data scheduling scheme is proposed to increase the
hardware utilization efficiency. From synthesis results, the pro-
posed FAID implementation needs only 52% area to reach the
same throughput as one of the most efficient standard Min-Sum
decoders for an example (7807, 7177) LDPC code, while achieving
better error-correcting performance in the error-floor region.
Compared to an offset Min-Sum decoder with longer word length,
the proposed design can achieve higher throughput with 45%
area, and still leads to possible performance improvement in the
error-floor region.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, error floor, low-density
parity-check codes (LDPC), trapping set, VLSI architecture.
I. INTRODUCTION
L
OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are used in
many applications due to their excellent error-correcting
performance. Traditionally, LDPC codes are decoded by the it-
erative belief propagation (BP) algorithm [1] or its approxima-
tions, such as the Min-Sum algorithm [2], with small perfor-
mance loss. It is now well-known that LDPC codes can asymp-
totically approach the Shannon limit. However, on finite-length
codes, the error-correcting performance curve in the low error-
Manuscript received September 05, 2013; revised December 22, 2013; ac-
cepted February 02, 2014. Date of publication March 20, 2014; date of cur-
rent version April 24, 2014. This material is based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grants ECCS-0846331, ECCS-0802159,
CCF-0963726, CCF-1314147 and Institut Universitaire de France. This paper
was recommended by Associate Editor S. Theodoridis.
F. Cai and X. Zhang are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106
(e-mail: {xinmiao.zhang,fang.cai}@case.edu).
D. Declercq and S. K. Planjery are with ETIS Lab, ENSEA-Université de
Cergy-Pontoise-CNRS, UMR 8051, 95014 Cergy-Pontoise, France (email: {de-
clercq,shiva.planjery}@ensea.fr).
B. Vasić is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Uni-
versity of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 (email: vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2014.2309896
rate region can flatten out due to the presence of cycles in the
corresponding Tanner graph. This is called the error floor. It
happens because the decoding can converge to trapping sets
[3], [4] and fail to correct all errors even if more decoding it-
erations are carried out. The performance in the error-floor re-
gion is of critical importance for applications that require very
low error rates, such as flash memory and optical communica-
tions. Intensive research has been conducted to lower the error
floor [5]–[7]. However, existing approaches need either multiple
decoding trials with high-overhead post-processing or compli-
cated variable node processing.
Recently, a new type of decoders referred to as finite alphabet
iterative decoders (FAIDs), were introduced for LDPC codes
[8], [12]. In these decoders, the messages are represented by al-
phabets with a very small number of levels, and the variable-to-
check (v-to-c) messages are derived from the check-to-variable
(c-to-v) messages and channel information through a prede-
fined Boolean map that is designed to optimize the error-cor-
recting capability in the error floor region. It has been shown
that with only an alphabet size of seven levels in the message
quantization, which translates to messages of 3-bit word length,
the FAIDs can outperform floating-point BP decoders in the
error-floor region over the binary symmetric channel (BSC). In
addition, multiple FAIDs with different map functions can be
adopted to further improve the performance at the cost of higher
complexity [13]. Although the current stage of development of
FAIDs is restricted to column-weight-three LDPC codes and
the BSC channel, this particular case is important for magnetic
recording applications, like e.g., hard-drives or flash-memories.
In this paper, more detailed analysis and simulation results
are provided for FAIDs, and a low-complexity implementation
architecture is proposed for FAIDs by making use of their prop-
erties. We show that FAIDs with seven-level alphabets can also
outperform the offset Min-Sum decoder with 6-bit word length
in the error-floor region over the BSC. Since the message word
length is very short in FAIDs, adopting bit-serial check node
units (CNUs) and processing all the v-to-c messages connected
to a check node simultaneously leads to higher efficiency in the
decoder. An innovative bit-serial CNU architecture is developed
for FAIDs based on the architecture in [10], which introduced
one of the most efficient designs for Min-Sum decoders. As op-
posed to the design in [10], both ‘
’ and ‘
’ are com-
puted in our CNU to prevent performance loss on the FAIDs.
Moreover, the Boolean maps at the variable node units (VNUs)
of FAIDs are symmetric and lead to small area requirement. An
optimized data scheduling scheme is also proposed in this paper
to maximize the hardware utilization efficiency. For a (7807,
7177) quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code, synthesis results show that
the proposed FAID implementation with 7-level alphabets only
1549-8328 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CAI et al.: FINITE ALPHABET ITERATIVE DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES
1367
requires 52% area to reach the same throughput as the stan-
dard Min-Sum decoder in [10] and 45% area to reach higher
throughput than the offset Min-Sum decoder with longer word
length, while achieving better performance in the error-floor re-
gion. Parts of this paper have appeared in [11].
The outline of this paper is as follows. Section III introduces
the framework of FAIDs highlighting their differences com-
pared to Min-Sum-based decoders and provides simulation re-
sults. We further demonstrate that the use of several FAIDs up-
date functions in the decoder leads to a substantial performance
gain in the error floor, and targets guaranteed error correction of
the LDPC decoder despites the presence of unavoidable trap-
ping sets in the Tanner graph of the code. The proposed decoder
architectures are presented in Section IV. Section V analyzes the
hardware complexity and provides comparisons with Min-Sum
decoders. Conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
An
binary LDPC code is a linear block code that can
be defined by its corresponding parity check matrix
or the
associated Tanner graph
. The Tanner graph
is a bipartite
graph that consists of a set of variable nodes
and a set of check nodes
In the graph
,
a check (variable) node represents a row (column) of
, and a
check node is connected to a variable node if the corresponding
entry in
is nonzero. The
matrix of a QC-LDPC code con-
sists of
sub-matrices of dimension
. Each sub-matrix
can be either a cyclically shifted identity matrix or a zero ma-
trix. Due to the regularity in
, QC-LDPC codes usually have
more efficient partial-parallel hardware implementations.
LDPC codes are decoded using message-passing decoders,
where messages are passed iteratively along the edges of the
graph
between check and variable nodes until a valid code-
word is found or the maximum number of iterations is reached.
A v-to-c message is determined by the VNU function using the
channel information and the c-to-v messages from all of its other
neighboring check nodes that were computed in the previous it-
eration. Similarly, the c-to-v message to a variable node is cal-
culated by the CNU function based on the v-to-c messages from
all other neighboring variable nodes. Note that an important fea-
ture of message-passing decoders is that during the calculation
of an outgoing message on a particular edge of the node, all in-
coming messages except the one on the particular edge are used
in the calculation. Such incoming messages shall be referred to
as extrinsic incoming messages.
Let
be the input to a message-passing
decoder where each
, also referred to as channel value, is
calculated based on the information received by the variable
node
from the channel. In this paper, we restrict our focus
to column-weight-three codes and the BSC.
III. FINITE ALPHABET ITERATIVE DECODERS
Definitions
We now describe the general framework of FAIDs that
was introduced in [12] for LDPC codes. An
-level
FAID denoted by
is defined as a 4-tuple given by
. The finite alphabet
defined as
, where
and
for any
, consists of
levels
for which the message values are confined to. The sign of a
message
can be interpreted as the estimate of the bit
associated with the variable node for which
is being passed
to or from (positive for zero and negative for one), and the
magnitude
as a measure of how reliable this value is.
The set
, which denotes the set of possible channel values,
is defined for the case of BSC as
.
For the
-th symbol of the codeword, the channel value
corresponding to node
is determined based on its received
value. The mapping
and
is used in this paper.
Let
denote the extrinsic incoming messages to a
node with degree .
The CNU function
used for the update at
a check node with degree
is given by
(1)
where
denotes the sign function.
The VNU function
used for the
update at a variable node
,
with degree
,
can be described as a closed-form function given by
(2)
where the function
is defined as follows based on a
threshold set T
such that
and
if
, and
.
if
otherwise
The weight
assigned to the channel value in (2), which is
one of the main difference of FAIDs compared to the state-of-
the-art decoders. It is computed from a symmetric function
whose input arguments are the
incoming
messages of a VNU. The function
could be linear or non-
linear, and its purpose is to modify the output of the VNU update
in order to prevent the failure of the message passing decoder on
specific small toplogies of error events referred to as Trapping
sets. The careful design of
through a systematic analysis of
the dominant Trapping sets of regular
LDPC codes is
the key feature of the FAID framework (see Section III-C). As a
result, the
function, and the corresponding FAID, are designed
to improve the error-rate performance in the error floor region.
Note that a particular FAID is uniquely specified by the
choice of the map for
as the function
is the same in all
FAIDs considered. Furthermore, the function
must satisfy
the following two properties.
1)
Property
1
(Property
of
Symmetry):
2)
Property
2
(Property
of
Monotonicity):
when
.
Alternatively, for column-weight-three codes, the VNU
function
can be represented as a simple two-dimensional
Boolean map or look-up table (LUT) that is defined for a
specific channel value. Table I shows an example of a Boolean
map defining
of a 7-level FAID when the channel value
is
. The corresponding map for
can be deduced from
symmetry.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1368
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014
TABLE I
BOOLEAN MAP DEFINING THE VNU OF A 7-LEVEL FAID WHEN
.
At the end of each decoding iteration, the hard-decision bit
corresponding to each variable node
is determined as the sign
of
.
A. Min-Sum-Based Decoders: Instances of FAIDs
For comparisons with FAIDs in this paper, we consider two
quantized Min-Sum-based decoders: the standard Min-Sum de-
coder, and the offset Min-Sum decoder. The VNU function
used in both the decoders is given by
(3)
where the value
can take 2 values for the BSC channel
.
The CNU for the standard Min-Sum decoder is the same
as the function used in FAIDs, which is given by (1). From
(1), it is clear that the c-to-v messages from a check node
can only have two possible magnitudes, which are the min-
imum and the second minimum among the magnitudes of
all incoming v-to-c messages. Let the two magnitudes be
denoted by
and
respectively. As a result, only four
values need to be recorded for each check node:
,
,
, and the index of the variable node, , that
provides
. Then the message to the variable node with
index
has magnitude
and the message to all other vari-
able nodes have
. The sign of each c-to-v message can be
computed as multiplying
with the sign of the corresponding
v-to-c message.
The CNU for the offset Min-Sum decoder [2] involves the
introduction of an offset factor
, and is given by
(4)
It is evident from (4) that in addition to the calculation of the
four values
,
,
, and the index
, the offset factor
must be subtracted from each magnitude in order to deter-
mine the outgoing message. The offset factor
serves to reduce
the overstimate of the outgoing message produced by a check
node using (1), especially when the magnitudes of the incoming
messages are small. Therefore, the offset factor is also often re-
ferred to as a correction factor. An appropriate choice of the
offset factor enables the decoder to achieve a performance ap-
proaching the performance of BP in the waterfall region while
also offering possible improvement in the error floor region.
TABLE II
VNU OF A 3-BIT OFFSET MIN-SUM REPRESENTED AS A FAID.
Note that in the representation of the offset Min-Sum decoder,
while the offset factor is introduced at the CNU as shown in (4),
an equivalent representation can be obtained by introducing the
offset factor at the VNU instead. Using this equivalent repre-
sentation, it can be shown that both the standard Min-Sum and
the offset Min-Sum decoders are instances of FAIDs. This is
due to the property of symmetry and property of monotonicity
that the VNU function
must satisfy. As an example, Table II
shows the VNU function for a 3-bit offset Min-Sum decoder as
a Boolean map which can also be treated as an instance of a
7-level FAID.
As can be seen in Table II, the offset corrected Min-Sum has
a very regular organisation in its LUT representation, and the
only non-linearity can be seen in the sequence of three zeros
in each column of the LUT, which is due to the offset cor-
rection. This non-linearity is already of great help in the iter-
ative decoding process since the offset corrected Min-Sum pro-
vide much greater error correction capability than the simple
Min-Sum. The LUT of the FAID decoder in Table I shows even
more non-linearities than the offset corrected Min-Sum. One ex-
ample is the fact that the amplitude gaps between two adjacent
squares could be greater than one, with the extreme case that
and
. Although it is difficult to directly
relate those non-linearities to a particular effect in terms of im-
proved error correction, the FAID analysis that we provide in
[12], [13], and in this paper, shows that a specific organisation
of these non-linearities in the LUT can lead to better iterative
decoders than the classical ones, especially in the error floor
region.
B. Discussion on the Design of FAIDs
The methodology used for designing FAIDs relies on the
knowledge of potentially harmful structures called trapping
sets [3] that could be present in the Tanner graph of the code,
and which cause conventional iterative decoders to fail for
certain low-weight error patterns. A notation typically used to
denote a trapping set (TS) is
where
is the number of
variable nodes and
is the number of odd-degree check nodes
in the subgraph induced by the variable nodes [3].
Fig. 1 shows the example of two trapping sets that are known
to be dominant in the error floor region for regular
LDPC codes. The (5, 3) TS is a subgraph consisting of 5 variable
nodes and 3 odd-degree check nodes while the (6, 4) TS is a
subgraph consisting of 6 variable nodes and 4 odd-degree check
nodes. If such structures are contained in the Tanner graph of
the code, they cause iterative decoders (BP-based as well as
Min-Sum-based) to fail when errors are located in the variable
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CAI et al.: FINITE ALPHABET ITERATIVE DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES
1369
Fig. 1. Examples of trapping sets for regular
LDPC codes. (a) (5, 3).
(b) (6, 4).
nodes of the trapping sets. The presence of these structures is
the source of the error floors for LDPC decoders.
The selection method for FAIDs begins by identifying such
harmful trapping sets from the trapping set ontology which
is a database of trapping sets with hierarchy established by
their topological relations [4], and then analyzing the message
passing of a given FAID on each of these isolated structures in
order to examine its error correction capability. The influence
of an arbitrary neighborhood of the harmful structure during
message-passing is partially captured by considering different
possible messages that enter the trapping set. Based on the
analysis on each trapping set, the FAID with the best error cor-
rection capability is chosen. For the design of the FAID defined
by Table I, the analysis of the message passing was done on the
(5, 3) TS as well as (6, 4). More details on the strategies and
algorithms used to design good FAIDs can be found in [12].
Using the above approach, it is possible to design 7-level
FAIDs that are capable of outperforming the floating-point
BP as well as the quantized Min-Sum-based decoders in the
error floor on a given code. Moreover, a single particularly
good 7-level FAID identified from the selection methodology
is capable of surpassing BP on several codes.
C. Simulation Results
In order to illustrate the efficiency of FAIDs, Fig. 2 shows
the frame error rate (FER) performance comparisons between
the BP, the Min-Sum-based decoders, and the 7-level FAID as
a function of the cross-over probability
over the BSC on a
(7807, 7177) QC-LDPC code with
,
, and
. Table I was used as the VNU function
for the
7-level FAID.
The parameters for the 3-bit offset Min-Sum decoder and
the 6-bit offset Min-Sum decoders are
and
respectively. Note that the offset correc-
tion values and the channel value of the Min-Sum decoders
have been adapted to our particular simulation settings, and opti-
mized through a density-evolution analysis by maximizing their
decoding treshold for regular
codes on the BSC channel,
combined with the selection procedure that was proposed for
FAIDs based on trapping sets in order to obtain a better perfor-
mance in the error floor region. To the best of our knowledge,
we are not aware of any other decoder designs in the literature
that specifically optimize the performance on the BSC.
From the figure, it is evident that the 7-level FAID clearly
outperforms the 5-bit Min-Sum (which exhibits very poor per-
formance), the 3-bit offset Min-Sum, and the floating-point BP
decoder in the error-floor region. Notice how the 6-bit offset
Fig. 2. Performance comparisons between various LDPC decoders for a (7807,
7177) QC-LDPC code.
Fig. 3. Performance comparisons between various LDPC decoders for a (2388,
1793) QC-LDPC code.
Min-Sum decoder approaches the performance of BP in the wa-
terfall while achieving significantly improved performance in
the error floor. For this code, the 7-level FAID with only 3 bits
of precision is able to perform close to the 6-bit offset Min-Sum
decoder in the error floor region.
Additional simulation results are provided in Fig. 3 to show
that the good 7-level FAID depicted in Table I is capable of
surpassing BP on other codes. These results were obtained on a
(2388, 1793) QC-LDPC code that was designed for the best BP
performance (for that code rate and length) by avoiding certain
harmful trapping sets during the code construction [14]. Even
for such a code, the 7-level FAID provides superior FER perfor-
mance in the error floor region compared to the floating-point
BP. Note that for this code, the 7-level FAID surpasses the
6-bit offset Min-Sum decoder in the error-floor regions. Hence
7-level FAIDs, which are 3-bit decoders, are capable of outper-
forming not only the floating-point BP decoders but also 6-bit
Min-Sum-based decoders. The number of maximum decoding
iterationsusedforallthedecodersissetto100inoursimulations.
D. Lowering the Error Floor With FAID Diversity
Since a particular FAID rule is designed to avoid the attrac-
tion of some specific types of error patterns located on trap-
ping sets, one can think of using different decoding rules that
are designed for different error patterns, and combine them in
the decoder. This approach has been proposed in [13] under the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1370
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014
name of FAID diversity. As a consequence, the use of the FAID
diversity framework allows to collectively correct a very large
number of dominant error patterns, and possibly reach a guar-
anteed error correction result, when a specific LDPC code is
targeted. Let us briefly describe the optimization procedure and
the FAID diversity decoder, and for more information, one can
refer to [13].
The message passing decoder using a multiplicity of different
FAIDs follows a sequential procedure: let us assume that the de-
coder uses
FAIDs. For each and every channel noise
realization, the FAIDs are run iteratively for a maximum of
.
When a given FAID
fails to converge after
iter-
ations, then the channel values are used to re-initialize the next
decoder
,untilacodewordisfoundorthemaximumnumber
of considered FAIDs has been reached (
). Note that in
the case
converges to a wrong codeword, we declare it as an
undetected error, and do not switch to the next decoder. The fact
thattheFAIDsareusedsequentiallydoesnotdecreasetheaverage
throughputcomparedtotheuseof asingle FAID. Indeed,sincein
the error floor region the first FAID has already a
,
this means that the FAID diversity feature is triggered only for an
average of one frame over
decoded frames. A more precise
discussion on the impact of FAID diversity on the hardware real-
izationofthedecoderispresentedinSectionV.
In this paper, we took the (7807, 7177) QC-LDPC code as ex-
ample and our goal has been, not only to improve the error cor-
rection performance in the error floor region, but also to target
a guaranteed error correction feature of the FAIDs using the
concept of diversity. In order to do so, the additional FAIDs
rules (appart from the first one described in Table I) will be
code dependent as designed to specifically correct the dominant
low-weight error patterns of the (7807, 7177) QC-LDPC code.
Since the
QC-LDPC code we use in
this paper has minimum distance
, we have targeted
a guaranteed error correction of
errors. The problematic
error patterns of Hamming weight
have been detected
using the knowledge of the small Trapping sets in the LDPC
code [15], [16] and a set of
FAIDs has been selected to
correct all the identified error patterns using the selection proce-
dure described in [13]. The list of the
FAIDs is given in
appendix A (the first decoder is the one of Table I). Although we
do not have a proof that the set of
FAIDs can guarantee
the correction of all 4-error patterns, we rely on the conjecture
presented in [13] to have a strong confidence that it is the case.
As an additional result, when one uses the
FAIDs in
a serial manner in the decoding algorithm, the performance in
the error floor is greatly increased as we gain a decade in the
error floor region compared to the use of a single FAID decoder
(see Fig. 4). In this figure, all decoders have been run for a max-
imum of 100 decoding iterations, and stopped when a codeword
was detected. To conclude, the performance of 7-level FAIDs
with diversity surpass all other decoders by one to several order
of magnitude in the error floor, including the offset-corrected
Min-Sum with 6 bits of precision.
In the next section, we will discuss the hardware implemen-
tation of FAIDs and provide synthesis results comparing FAIDs
with Min-Sum-based decoders. We will show that with the pro-
posed VLSI architectures, FAIDs can also provide substantial
gains in chip area.
Fig. 4. Performance of FAID diversity for the (7807, 7177) QC-LDPC code.
Fig. 5. Bit-serial CNU architecture for the FAID.
IV. VLSI ARCHITECTURES FOR FAIDS
In this section, an efficient FAID implementation architecture
is developed for QC-LDPC codes. Since the FAID require very
short word length, adopting bit-serial CNU and processing all
the v-to-c messages connected to a check node simultaneously
would lead to higher efficiency. This section proposes an inno-
vative bit-serial CNU architecture based on the design in [10].
The CNU in [10] only computes
, and
is used
as
. However, such an approximation could lead to per-
formance loss and raise the error floor in the FAID. In our pro-
posed CNU, both
and
are computed at the expense
of small area overhead. Moreover, the VNU can be efficiently
implemented due to the symmetry in the Boolean map table. An
optimized interleaved data scheduling scheme is also developed
in this section to maximize the hardware utilization efficiency
of the FAID.
A. CNU Architecture
Fig. 5 shows the proposed bit-serial CNU architecture. The
v-to-c messages are in sign-magnitude form. They are input
simultaneously starting from the most significant bits (MSBs)
of the magnitudes, and the sign bits are loaded last as the least
significant bits (LSBs). Each input has a flag
(
).
`
means that the corresponding input is a candidate of
the minimum magnitude. At the beginning, the flags are all ‘0’.
After a flag is flipped to ‘1’, it will stay at ‘1’ and mask the
corresponding input through the OR gate on the left column of
Fig. 5. The outputs of the OR gates are ANDed together. If any
unmasked input bit is ‘0’, the output of the
-input AND gate
in the middle is ‘0’. As a result, the unmasked inputs whose bits
are ‘1’ will have the corresponding flags flipped to ‘1’. If none
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CAI et al.: FINITE ALPHABET ITERATIVE DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES
1371
Fig. 6. VNU architectures: (a) VNU of the Min-Sum decoder; (b) VNU of the FAID.
of the unmasked inputs is ‘0’, then the flags remain unchanged.
Apparently, the output of the
-input AND gate is the bit of the
minimum magnitude in each clock cycle. Assume that
is the
word length,
is available at the registers after
clock
cycles. Also, the index
can be derived from the flags at this
time. In the
th clock cycle, the signs of the input messages are
XORed to compute
.
In our design,
is computed after
is derived. There
are two cases to consider.
1) Case 1: There is only one unique
, and accordingly
only one flag is ‘0’ at the end of the
th clock cycle. In
this case,
should be the minimum magnitude among the
rest
inputs. Hence, it can be computed by using the ar-
chitecture in Fig. 5 for a second round and initializing the flag
corresponding to the input that equals
as ‘1’. The
flags
for
should be loaded into another set of registers to de-
rive the index
before the second round starts. Also the second
round only needs
clock cycles since
does not need to
be computed again.
2) Case 2: There are multiple equal minimum magnitudes
in the input messages, and accordingly multiple zero flags at the
end of the computation for
. In this case,
is equal to
, and does not need further computation.
To differentiate these two cases, a unique zero detector (UZD)
is included in the CNU. Its output signal, ‘ ’, is asserted when
there is only one zero flag. It can be generated as
where the add and multiply denote logic OR and AND, respec-
tively. Through substructure sharing, the area requirement of the
UZD can be reduced.
B. VNU Architecture
The Boolean map for the VNU in the FAID can be efficiently
implemented in a bit-parallel way using logic gates.
c-to-v
messages and the channel information are available to the VNU
at the same time. After one clock cycle,
v-to-c messages are
derived simultaneously. To facilitate the computations in the
CNUs, the alphabet levels are encoded into binary representa-
tions according to sign-magnitude format. Since the Boolean
map is symmetric, the logic expression of each output bit can
be effectively simplified through Karnaugh-map reduction. For
the purpose of comparison, Fig. 6 shows the architectures of the
VNUs for the Min-Sum decoder and the FAID. Besides com-
puting the v-to-c messages, the VNUs also add up all the c-to-v
messages and the channel information. The sign of the sum is
the hard-decision. In the VNU of the Min-Sum decoder with
, seven adders are required to take care of the cor-
responding computations in one clock cycles. Moreover, the
Min-Sum decoder needs saturation modules to bound the sum of
Fig. 7. Top level architecture of the FAID.
the messages within
bits. One more clock cycle is required to
implement the saturation These modules are not necessary in the
VNU of the FAID since the output messages are decided by the
Boolean map and have the same word length as the input mes-
sages. The CNUs need the messages in sign-magnitude format.
In the FAID, the inputs and outputs of the boolean map are both
in sign-magnitude format. The messages only need to be con-
verted to two’s complement format to compute the hard-deci-
sions. On the contrary, the VNUs in the Min-Sum decoder add
up the c-to-v messages to derive the c-to-v messages as shown
in (3). Therefore, conversion units are needed both at the inputs
and outputs.
C. Top Level Decoder Architecture
The top level architecture of our proposed FAID architecture
is shown in Fig. 7. Assume that the
matrix of the QC-LDPC
code has
nonzero sub-matrixes of dimension
, our
proposed decoder employs
CNUs to process all rows of
si-
multaneously in order to reach high throughput for optical com-
munication and data storage systems. Accordingly, the check
node processing for a decoding iteration can be finished in
clock cycles:
clock cycles to find
, one clock
cycle for unique zero detection, and
clock cycles to com-
pute
if necessary. In each decoding iteration, variable
node processing follows check node processing. The VNUs and
CNUs are connected through permutation networks according
to the locations of the nonzero entries in the
matrix. Since
the computations of VNUs and CNUs are carried out in bit-par-
allel and bit-serial manner, respectively, parallel-to-serial (se-
rial-to-parallel) convertors are required before the messages are
passed from VNUs to CNUs (CNUs to VNUs). The informa-
tion
computed from the CNUs are stored
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1372
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014
Fig. 8. Scheduling of the computations in the decoding process.
in registers inside the CNUs. The total size of the registers is
. Moreover, the hard-decision bits
and the channel information are stored in memory blocks asso-
ciated with the VNUs.
To increase the hardware utilization efficiency, two data
blocks can be interleaved as proposed in [10], so that the
variable node processing for one data block overlaps the check
node processing of the other block. However, in the design
of [10],
VNUs are adopted, and each bit-parallel VNU
generates
v-to-c messages for the same column of
in one
clock cycle. Hence, the variable node processing only takes
one clock cycle, which is much shorter than the latency of the
check node processing. This causes the VNUs to be idle most
of the time. To maximize the hardware utilization efficiency, we
propose to adopt less copies of the VNUs, and use the VNUs
in a time-multiplexed manner to match the speed of the CNUs.
As a result, the hardware cost of the overall decoder can be
significantly reduced without sacrificing the throughput.
Fig. 8 shows the proposed scheduling of the computations in
the decoding process. The darker and clear bars belong to the
decoding of two data blocks. Since each column of
does not
have a dedicated VNU in our design, the results of the CNUs
need to be permuted before they are sent to the VNUs according
to the locations of the nonzero entries in
. This permutation
can be done by multiplexors in one clock cycle. To match the
speed of the CNUs, the columns of
need to be divided into
groups, and the variable node processing for each group
is completed in one clock cycle. In addition, the permutation
can be simplified as barrel shifting if the columns of
pro-
cessed each time are whole block columns of size
. Therefore,
VNUs can be adopted. The digits on the bars
for the VNUs in Fig. 8 are the indices of the groups of columns.
Without sacrificing the throughput, our scheme requires a sub-
stantially smaller number of VNUs than that in [10] at the ex-
pense of a small permutation network. Due to the interleaving,
the registers for storing
and the v-to-c mes-
sages need to be doubled to avoid access conflicts. These regis-
ters are also used as serial-to-parallel and parallel-to-serial con-
verters between the VNUs and CNUs.
V. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS AND COMPARISONS
Taking a (7807, 7177) QC-LDPC code with
,
, and
as an example, the proposed FAID
is synthesized in this section and compared with the Min-Sum
decoder architecture in [10], which is among the most efficient
existing designs. As shown in Figs. 2 and 3, with 7-level al-
phabets, which translate to 3-bit word length, the FAID decoder
can achieve better performance than the belief propagation and
offset Min-Sum decoder with 6-bit word length in the error floor
region. It also outperforms the standard Min-Sum decoder and
offset Min-Sum decoder with the same word length in the wa-
terfall region. The proposed CNU and VNU for the FAID with
are synthesized using SMIC 180 nm CMOS technology
TABLE III
SYNTHESIS RESULTS FOR CNUS USING 180 NM CMOS TECHNOLOGY.
and compared with those with
and 6 for the Min-Sum
decoder using the architecture from [10] in Tables III and IV,
respectively. During the synthesis, the clock frequency is set
to higher values gradually, and the largest clock frequency that
does not lead to sudden increase in the area is listed as the max-
imum achievable clock frequency in these tables.
Since the CNU for the Min-Sum decoder in [10] is bit-serial,
the gate count remains unchanged for different word length
. The offset operation for the offset Min-Sum decoder is
achieved more efficiently in bit-parallel manner. Hence, the
corresponding complexity is included in the VNU instead.
Compared to the CNU in [10], the extra UZD needed in the
proposed CNU causes 21% area increase. The Min-Sum check
node processing in [10] with word length
can be finished
in
clock cycles. However, another clock cycle is spent on
computing
. Hence, the latency of the
Min-Sum CNU in [10] is
clock cycles.
It can be seen from Table IV that the proposed FAID VNU has
smaller area. The major reason is that multiple 5 or 6-bit adders
are required in the VNUs of the Min-Sum decoder as shown in
Fig. 6(a), while the 3-bit symmetric Boolean map in the FAID
can be implemented with simpler logic. In addition, the VNUs
in the Min-Sum decoder need saturation modules and more units
to convert messages from two’s complement to sign-magnitude
format. The 6-bit VNU for the offset Min-Sum decoder is larger
than the 5-bit VNU for the standard Min-Sum decoder because
of the longer word length and the extra computations needed for
the offset. Also the offset calculations lead to another stage of
pipelining latency
The synthesis results of the overall (7807, 7177) QC-LDPC
decoders are listed in Table V. Compared to the Min-Sum
decoders using the architecture in [10], the number of VNUs
needed in our FAID design is reduced to less than 1/4, and
each VNU is smaller. Moreover, the registers for storing the
v-to-c messages,
, and
in the FAID is less since
the word length is shorter. Although the FAID requires extra
permutation networks and its CNUs have additional UZDs and
copies of registers for storing the flags resulted from the
computation, the VNUs dominate the overall decoder area due
to the high code rate. As a result, the proposed FAID needs
52% or less of the area of the Min-Sum decoders using the
architecture in [10]. After pipelining the VNUs in the offset
Min-Sum decoder, the critical paths of all three decoders lie
in the CNUs, and they are the same. Although the FAID and
standard Min-Sum decoders require the same number of clock
cycles in each decoding iteration, the offset Min-Sum decoder
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CAI et al.: FINITE ALPHABET ITERATIVE DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES
1373
TABLE IV
SYNTHESIS RESULTS FOR VNUS USING 180 NM CMOS TECHNOLOGY.
TABLE V
SYNTHESIS RESULTS QC-LDPC DECODERS USING 180 NM CMOS TECHNOLOGY.
Fig. 9. Different entries between Table I and those in the appendix.
needs more clock cycles due to the extra pipelining stage in the
VNU. Assuming 15 decoding iterations are needed and two data
blocks are interleaved, the proposed FAID decoder can achieve
throughput. If
100 decoding iterations are required, the throughput is reduced
to
.
The synthesis results are also compared with the designs
in [17], which is the one of the most efficient design using
Min-sum algorithm. The area of the design in [17] uses 65 nm
technology and the corresponding result has been scaled to
180 nm technology for fair comparison. Moreover, the code
length in [17] is slightly longer than the code in this paper.
As can be seen, after scaling the process, the proposed design
requires 57% area of the proposed design. However, the [17]
requires seven times longer decoding latency since it adopts a
partial parallel scheduling and leads to much less throughput.
Considering this, the proposed decoder achieves higher effi-
ciency compared to [17].
As discussed in Section III.E, using different decoders one
after another improves the performance. The decoders are only
different in the tables used for the variable node processing.
Hence, only the VNUs need to be modified in order to accom-
modate multiple decoders. Most of the entries in Table I and the
six tables listed in Table VI in the appendix are the same. As a
result, many logic gates can be shared to implement the seven
tables. Fig. 9 shows the different entries of the tables. This figure
has 7
7 blocks denoting the 7
7 entries in a table. If a table
has an entry different from that in Table I, a dot is put into the
corresponding block. Dots of different colors correspond to dif-
ferent tables. The dots in this figure only indicate the locations
of the differences. However, they facilitate the discovery of the
groups of tables among D2 to D7 that share the same entries.
For example, the entries for
,
,
and
in Fig. 9 have
the same four colored dots and tell that
,
,
, and
are
different from Table I in these entries. From Table VI, it can be
also observed that the these four entries in the four tables are ac-
tually the same, and hence the corresponding logic can be shared
in the implementations of
,
,
, and
. Similarly, by
observing the other blocks in Fig. 9 that have the same colored
dots and then referring to Table VI, the other terms sharable in
the implementation of different tables are located. The synthesis
results of the VNU implementing 7 tables are listed in the last
column of Table IV. The VNU implementing 7 tables is set with
the same timing constraint as the one-table counterpart. As can
be seen in Table IV, only 89% extra area is required when 7
tables are all involved. The major reason is that by taking ad-
vantage of the characteristics of the 7 tables, many logic gates
can be shared and thus many cases can be grouped together for
the 7-table VNU instead of implementing 7 individual tables
separately. The corresponding result for overall decoder imple-
menting 7 tables is also included in Table V. Compared to the
one-table counterpart, only 23% extra area is needed.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a low-complexity implementation architecture
was developed for the recently introduced FAIDs. A novel bit-
serial CNU was designed for the FAID and the implementa-
tion of the Boolean map for VNU is simplified using it sym-
metric property. In addition, the computation scheduling was
optimized to fully utilize the hardware units. Compared to most
efficient existing Min-Sum decoders, the proposed FAID de-
coder requires substantially smaller area to achieve the same
throughput. Our future work will be devoted to two aspects.
First, we will continue to reduce the complexity of multiple
FAIDs with different Boolean maps, which can be adopted to
further lower the error floor. Another interesting direction of re-
search includes the generalization of the FAID framework for
larger alphabets, other LDPC codes distributions, or more com-
plex channels. Neither of those generalizations are trivial be-
cause of the following reason: our approach of decoder design
using FAIDs relies on the exact knowledge of the weaknesses of
a particular LDPC code, decoded with FAID. Those weaknesses
for regular
and the BSC channel are known as
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1374
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 5, MAY 2014
TABLE VI
LIST OF THE 7-LEVEL FAIDS USED IN THIS PAPER. THE SEVEN FAIDS ARE CONJECTURED TO GUARANTEE AN ERROR CORRECTION OF
ON THE (7807,
7177) QC-LDPC CODE.
they are precisely defined as the trapping sets. For a generaliza-
tion of FAIDs, one then has to characterize the weaknesses of
or even irregular LDPC codes on the AWGN channel,
but we know that it is not just a simple extension of the trap-
ping-set analysis, as it is related to the more complicated notion
of pseudo-codewords.
APPENDIX
LIST OF 7-LEVEL FAIDS USED IN THE FAID DIVERSITY
ALGORITHM
In Table VI, we list the 7-level FAIDs used in this paper for
the decoding of the (7807, 7177) QC-LDPC code. We only in-
dicate the entries
of the LUT array (see Table I) that cannot
be deduced by symmetry. In this table,
represents the LUT
entry in the -th row and the
-th column. Note that the first
decoder
in Table VI is the one indicated in the LUT of
Table I.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Davey and D. J. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes over
,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[2] J. Chen et al., “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[3] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu.
Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comut., 2003.
[4] B. Vasic, S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K. Planjery, “Trap-
ping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Con-
trol, Comput., Sep. 2009.
[5] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[6] S. K. Planjery et al., “Iterative decoding beyond belief propagation,”
in Proc. Info. Theory Appl. Workshop, Feb. 2010.
[7] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative de-
coding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC
codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[8] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic, “Finite alphabet
iterative decoders for LDPC codes surpassing floating-point iterative
decoders,” Electron. Lett., vol. 47, no. 16, pp. 919–921, Aug. 2011.
[9] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, S. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Multi-
level decoders surpassing belief propagation on the binary symmetric
channel,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Info. Theory, Austin, TX, Jul. 2010,
pp. 769–773.
[10] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A bit-serial ap-
proximate Min-Sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation,” in
Proc. IEEE Intl. Symp. Circuits Syst., May 2006.
[11] F. Cai, X. Zhang, D. Declercq, B. Vasic, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K.
Planjery, “Low-complexity finite alphabet iterative decoders for LDPC
codes,” in Proc. IEEE Intl Symp. Circuits and Syst., May 2013.
[12] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic, “Finite alphabet
iterative decoders, Part I: Decoding beyond belief propagation on the
BSC,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4033–4045, Oct.
2013.
[13] D. Declercq, B. Vasic, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, “Finite alphabet iter-
ative decoders, Part II: Towards guaranteed error correction of LDPC
codes via iterative decoder diversity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61,
no. 10, pp. 4046–4057, Oct. 2013.
[14] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasic, “On
the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012.
[15] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Improved impulse method to evaluate
the low-weight profile of sparse binary linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Inform. Theory, Toronto, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1963–1967.
[16] S. Abu-Surra, D. Declerq, D. Divsalar, and W. Ryan, “Trapping set
enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inform. Theory App.
Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[17] H. Zhong et al., “Area-efficient min-sum decoder design for high-rate
quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in magnetic recording,”
IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117–4122, Dec. 2007.
Fang Cai (S’10-M’13) received the B.S. degree
in electrical engineering from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 2007, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering and computer
science from Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH, in 2011 and 2013, respectively.
Since then, he has been with Marvell Semicon-
ductor, where he is currently a senior DSP engineer.
His current research interests include the algorithm
design and the VLSI architectures implementation
for communications and digital signal processing,
with the emphasis on system design for wire-line transmission such as timing
recovery, equalization and error-correction coding
Xinmiao
Zhang
(S’04–M’05–SM’10)
received
the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Tianjin University,
Tianjin, China, in 1997 and 2000, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities, in 2005, all in electrical
engineering.
Since then, she has been with Case Western
Reserve University, where she is currently a Timothy
E. and Allison L. Schroeder Associate Professor
in the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science. Her research interests include
VLSI architecture design for communications, cryptosystems, and digital
signal processing.
Dr. Zhang was a recipient of the NSF CAREER Award in 2009, and the
Best Paper Award at the ACM Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI 2004. She is
the co-editor of the book ”Wireless Security and Cryptography: Specifications
and Implementations” (CRC Press, 2007) and the guest editor for the Springer
MONET Journal Special Issue on ”Next Generation Hardware Architectures for
Secure Mobile Computing”. She is a member of the Circuits and Systems for
Communications and VLSI Systems and Applications technical committees of
the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society and the Design and Implementation of
Signal Processing Systems technical committee of the IEEE Signal Processing
Society. She has served on technical program committees of ACM Great Lakes
Symposium on VLSI, IEEE Workshops on Signal Processing Systems, IEEE
Global Communications Conference and the reviewer committees of IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on Circuits and Systems. She is currently an Associate
Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS-I.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CAI et al.: FINITE ALPHABET ITERATIVE DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES
1375
David Declercq (M’06–SM’12) was born in June,
1971. He received the Ph.D.degree in statistical
signal processing in 1998, from the University of
Cergy-Pontoise, France.
He is currently a Full Professor at the ENSEA in
Cergy-Pontoise, and the recipient of a junior position
at the ”Institut Universitaire de France”. His research
topics lie in digital communications and error-correc-
tion coding theory. He worked several years on a par-
ticular family of LDPC codes, both from the code and
decoder design aspects. Since 2003, he developed a
strong expertise on non-binary LDPC codes and decoders in high order Ga-
lois fields GF(q). A large part of his research projects are related to non-bi-
nary LDPC codes. He mainly investigated two aspects: 1) the design of GF(q)
LDPC codes for short and moderate lengths, and 2) the simplification of the it-
erative decoders for GF(q) LDPC codes with complexity/performance tradeoff
constraints. He has published more than 30 papers in major journals (including
EURASIP JWCN), and more than 100 papers in major conferences on informa-
tion theory and signal processing.
Dr. Declercq is the general secretary of the National GRETSI association.
Shiva Kumar Planjery received the B.Tech in
electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of
Technology – Madras, Chennai, India, in 2005, and
a M.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Victoria, BC, Canada, in 2007. Under
a dual degree program, he received the Ph.D. degree
from the University of Cergy-Pontoise, Cergy-Pon-
toise, France, in Dec. 2012, with a specialization
in communication and information theory, and the
Ph.D. dgree from the University of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ, in electrical engineering in August, 2013.
His current research interests include error control coding, information
theory, and digital communications with specific focus on the design and
analysis of low-complexity iterative decoding algorithms for LDPC codes.
Bane Vasić (S’90–SM’02–F’12) is a Professor of
Electrical and Computer Engineering and Mathe-
matics at the University of Arizona. He is affiliated
with BIO5, the Institute for Collaborative Beore-
search, and is a Director of the Error Correction
Laboratory. He is an inventor of the soft error-event
decoding algorithm, and the key architect of a
detector/decoder for Bell Labs magnetic recording
read channel chips, which were regarded as the best
in industry. Different variants of this algorithm were
implemented in virtually all magnetic hard drives.
His pioneering work on structured low-density parity check (LDPC) error
correcting codes and invention of codes has enabled low-complexity iterative
decoder implementations. Structured LDPC codes are today adopted in a
number of communications standards, and are used in extremely high-density
magnetic hard drives. His theoretical work in error correction coding theory
and codes on graphs has led to analytical characterization of the hard decision
iterative decoders of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, and design of
codes and decoders with best error-floor performance known today.
Dr. Vasić’s editorial and conference organizing responsibilities include: the
2003 IEEE Communication Theory Workshop, the 2004 DIMACS Workgroup
and the Workshop on Theoretical Advances in Information Recording, the 2004
Los Alamos Workshop on Applications of Statistical Physics to Coding Theory,
the Communication Theory Symposium of the 2006 ICC, and the 2007 Com-
munication Theory Workshop. Dr. Vasic currently serves as a Member of the
Editorial Board of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS and Guest Editor
of the JSAC “Special Issue on Data Communication Techniques for Storage
Channels and Networks.”
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:34:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
