892
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 5, MAY 2014
Classification Codes for Soft Information
Generation from Hard Flash Reads
Mustafa N. Kaynak, Patrick R. Khayat, and Sivagnanam Parthasarathy
Abstract—In this paper, a tensor product-based classification
code (CC) is proposed to generate coarse soft information based
on the hard flash reads for use in soft information-utilizing
error correction codes (ECCs), particularly low-density parity
check (LDPC) codes. Analysis and simulation results have shown
that with a small ECC overhead, CC helps the LDPC code
decoder achieve better performance compared to a hard-input
case. Furthermore, the proposed code has very simple encoding
and decoding algorithms; therefore, it can be easily implemented
in hardware to aid existing ECC systems.
Index Terms—Tensor product, error correction codes, flash
memory cells, soft information generation.
I. INTRODUCTION
F
LASH memory was invented by Dr. Fujio Masuoka of
Toshiba Corporation in 1980 and was first made public
in 1984 at the IEEE Electronic Devices Meeting. Among the
two types of flash memory, NOR offers byte access, but lacks
density, whereas NAND has high density, but does not offer
byte access. Even though both types found use in different
applications, today the use of and market for NAND memory
devices are more widespread.
Flash-based storage systems are superior to legacy magnetic
recording systems in read/write throughputs (especially in ran-
dom reads/writes) and power consumption. Furthermore, lack
of moving parts and wide range of operating temperatures are
added benefits for flash memory. However, these advantages
come with a price tag. The per-giga byte cost of flash memory
is typically 10 times more expensive than magnetic recording
systems.
Despite the price disadvantage, today’s mobile phones,
tablets, digital cameras, music players, and thumb drives ex-
clusively use memory devices based on flash memory because
of all its benefits. More recently, solid state drives (SSDs)
started to replace hard disk drives (HDDs) in higher-end
laptops, including MacBook Air and the Intel UltraBook.
Finally, enterprise SSDs have started to shave down the market
share of HDDs in the server industry, especially with the wider
adoption of cloud computing, which requires extremely high
input/output operations per second (IOPS).
Next-generation flash devices [1] have significantly higher
raw-bit error rates (RBERs) due to the smaller cell sizes as
well as several other interference and noise mechanisms, in-
cluding read/write disturb. Consequently, the increased RBERs
Manuscript received May 15, 2013; revised October 1, 2013 and December
10, 2013.
All authors are with NAND System Engineering Group of Micron Tech-
nology in San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: mkaynak@ micron.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2014.140509.
must be taken into account while designing ECCs for flash
controllers.
Until recently, Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes
were the default ECC choice for majority of the flash con-
trollers due to their guaranteed correction capability and
efficient hardware implementation. In order for BCH codes
to deal with the high RBERs of upcoming flash devices, a
significantly higher ECC overhead must be used. For instance,
2KB BCH code requires a code rate of less than 0.8 to achieve
a user bit error rate (UBER) of 1.0E-15 at an average RBER of
1.0E-2. Given that ECC overhead has a direct cost implication,
excessive ECC overhead of BCH codes makes them cost-
ineffective for future flash controllers.
Recently, there has been a significant push to employ
more powerful, soft information-utilizing ECCs such as LDPC
codes [2] in next-generation flash controllers [3]-[4]. Two
major advantages of LDPC codes are reasonable hardware
implementation complexity and near Shannon capacity per-
formance in the presence of soft information, which is very
costly to generate and transfer from flash due to the multiple
number of reads required.
Given the significant cost of soft information, hard read
mode is the preferred mode of operation for flash devices.
However, a lack of soft information cripples ECCs that can
utilize soft information. For instance, an LDPC code decoder
can decode with only hard information, but it cannot approach
channel capacity in this case.
In this paper, we are proposing to use a small portion of the
total ECC budget for a tensor product-based detection code,
which we call “classification code.” The main objective of
the CC is to generate coarse soft information based on the
hard reads from flash for use in the LDPC code decoder.
Quality and granularity of the generated soft information will
depend on the ECC budget allocated to the classification code.
Analysis and simulation results have shown that with quite
a small ECC overhead, CC helps the LDPC code decoder
achieve better results compared to a hard-input case.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we give a
system overview, followed by the review of tensor product
codes in Section III. Section IV discusses details of the
proposed classification code and soft information generation.
Analysis of CC is given in Section V and simulation results
are reported in Section VI. The paper is concluded in Section
VII.
II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The multi-level flash cell (MLC) used in this study is
modeled as follows. We assume a fixed voltage range (approx-
imately 4−5 volts) between the peak of the erase distribution
0733-8716/14/$31.00 c⃝2014 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:35:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KAYNAK et al.: CLASSIFICATION CODES FOR SOFT INFORMATION GENERATION FROM HARD FLASH READS
893
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
Vt
Vt Distribution
L0
L1
L2
L3
Fig. 1. Sample four-level Vt distribution (2 bits/cell)
(left-most distribution, L0 in Fig. 1) and the peak of right-
most distribution (L3 in Fig. 1). In this fixed voltage range,
multiple levels are then placed. In the sample flash voltage (Vt)
distribution shown in Fig. 1, four levels are equally placed in
the fixed voltage range of 4 volts, i.e., from the peak of L0
to the peak of L3. Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
is applied to each level. In this study, we assume each level
is subject to same AWGN variance. Some studies use more
elaborate Vt distributions with different noise variance for
different levels and/or unequal spacing between levels [5]-[6].
Determining the state of each cell (in terms of which level
the cell is programmed to) requires a minimum number of
reads, and the resultant information is called “hard informa-
tion.” In Fig. 1, red arrows show the hard read positions for
each valley. Reliability information can be extracted from the
cell by making additional reads. For the left-most valley, Fig. 1
shows two additional read positions with shorter blue arrows.
These read positions will help determine whether or not the
charge stored in the cell is closer to the valley. As an example,
consider the case that hard read position for the left-most
valley determines that the state of the cell is L0. In addition,
if the soft read positions indicate that the charge is to the left
of the left-most soft read position (closer to the peak of L0),
the bit is more reliable compared to the case that the charge
is to the right of left-most soft read position (closer to the
valley). Increasing the number of soft read positions provides
finer-resolution soft information.
Soft information is usually very costly. The first component
of this cost is the increased read time due to the higher number
of reads to be performed. For instance, making three reads
instead of one read will approximately cost three times more
time to finish the read operation. The second component of the
cost is the amount of time it takes to transfer the results of
the reads through the flash interface. Given that each flash
storage device is made of multiple channels with multiple
flash dies per channel, no other flash die connected to the
particular channel transferring soft information can send or
receive information. This results in a significant decrease in
the read/write throughput delivered by that particular channel.
LDPC Code 
Encoder
CC 
Encoder
LDPC Code 
Decoder
CC 
Decoder
NAND 
FLASH
User 
Data
Decoded 
Sequence
Fig. 2. System block diagram
Determining the soft read positions and corresponding reli-
ability values, i.e., the log likelihood ratios (LLRs), is another
important issue [7]. Given that each flash part (that is made
of multiple dies and blocks) is subject to die-to-die, block-to-
block and page-to-page variations, one has to take into account
these variations as well as the change of Vt distribution over
time with cycling and retention in determining read positions
and corresponding LLRs.
On the positive side, soft information helps ECC approach
channel capacity, and in the case of an iterative ECC decoder,
convergence is faster with reliability information. This is quite
important for practical systems, as any extra decoder iteration
translates into extra consumed power.
To summarize: if generated properly, soft information is a
very powerful tool to help soft ECC decoders correct high
error rates. However, there is a significant throughput price to
pay for this high error-correction capability.
In this study, we consider a high rate LDPC code as the
main error correction code. The proposed classification code
aids the LDPC code by generating coarse soft information
from hard flash reads and passing this information to the
LDPC code decoder. The focus of this study is not ECC;
therefore, there is not too much emphasis on the ECC. The
proposed classification code can help improve the performance
of any soft information-utilizing ECC scheme.
The write and read paths shown in Fig. 2 work as follows.
User bits are encoded with LDPC and classification codes, and
the corresponding parity bits are appended to the user bits.
The resultant encoded sequence is mapped to levels and then
written to the flash. At the read path, the classification code
decoder receives hard flash information, generates coarse soft
information and passes this information to the LDPC code
decoder. After running a certain fixed number of iterations,
the LDPC code decoder may pass the resultant hard-decoded
sequence to the CC decoder so that it can re-generate/refine the
coarse soft information it generated initially and pass this back
to the LDPC code decoder. Between these two decoders, one
can work out different soft information exchange scheduling
scenarios, which will have different performance and power
implications.
In the next section, we review tensor product codes and then
give details of the proposed classification code in Section IV.
III. TENSOR PRODUCT CODES
Tensor product (TP) codes proposed by J. Wolf in the
1960s are formed by taking the “tensor” product of two
constituent codes, i.e., C1 and C2 [8], [9], [10]. Properties
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:35:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
894
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 5, MAY 2014
of the constituent codes determine the functionality of the
resultant tensor product code (TPC):
• C1: detection code, C2: detection code →TPC: detection
code
• C1: detection code, C2: correction code →TPC: location
code
• C1: correction code, C2: correction code →TPC: correc-
tion code
We can illustrate tensor product by the following example:
• C1 is a rate 4/5 single-parity code: detection code
• C2 is a rate 4/7 Hamming code: correction code
Parity-check matrices of C1, C2 and the tensor product of
H(C1) and H(C2) are as follows:
H(C1) = [1 1 1 1 1]
H(C2) =
⎡
⎣
1 1 1 0 1 0 0
1 1 0 1 0 1 0
1 0 1 1 0 0 1
⎤
⎦
H(TPC) =
⎡
⎣
1111111 −1111111 −· · · −0000000
1111111 −1111111 −· · · −0000000
1111111 −0000000 −· · · −1111111
⎤
⎦
H(C1) is 1×5, H(C2) is 3×7 and the resultant H(TPC) is
3×35. Thus the resultant code rate is 32/35. While getting the
tensor product, H(C1) is multiplied by each entry of H(C2).
For instance, the first five entries of the first row of H(TPC)
are computed by multiplying the H(C1) by H(C2)(1,1) which
is a 1. Similarly, the last five bits of the second row of H(TPC)
are computed by multiplying H(C1) by H(TPC) (2,7)=0. We
note that, the resultant CC is not the code that is used for
performance analysis in the upcoming sections.
IV. CLASSIFICATION CODE
We propose to use the tensor product of a single-bit parity
check code (C1) and a binary algebraic code (C2) as a
classification code. Here are the parameters of the constituent
and the resultant codes:
1) C1 is capable of detecting an odd number of errors. We
refer to C1 codewords as “chunks.” A chunk will be in
error when odd number of bits are in error. Clearly, C1
will be unable to detect even number of bit errors.
2) C2 is capable of correcting “t” errors and detecting “t+1”
errors.
3) The resultant code will be a “location code” with the
following capabilities:
• “t” or fewer chunks are in error: CC correctly
locates the chunks that are in error.
• “t+1” chunks are in error: CC detects that the
resultant codeword has “t+1” chunks in error but
cannot locate the chunks that are in error.
• If there are more than “t+1” errors, CC will not
be able to correctly detect the chunks that are in
error. In this case, the chunks will be misidentified.
As a result, improper reliabilities are assigned to
some bits. We elaborate more on this in the coming
sections.
Below, we give details of the CC encoder and decoder.
TABLE I
TPC CODEWORD
User Bits
U1
U6
U11
U16
U21
U25
U29
User Bits
U2
U7
U12
U17
U22
U26
U30
User Bits
U3
U8
U13
U18
U23
U27
U31
User Bits
U4
U9
U14
U19
U24
U28
U32
User/Parity Bits
U5
U10
U15
U20
P1
P2
P3
Syndrome Bits
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
A. Classification-Code Encoder
Classification code is a systematic code; therefore, encoding
is simply generating the parity bits of the CC, which involves
only “additions.” We explain the encoding process by using
the simple example considered in the previous section. The
code rate for this case is 32/35, so each 32-bits user bit block
is mapped into a 35-bits TP codeword. For this mapping, we
use the following approach. Assume the 32-bits user bit block
is as follows: U = [U1 U2 ... U32]. The TPC codeword will
be of the form shown in Table I, where P1, P2, and P3 are
the parity bits. Encoding is done by the use of “phantom
syndromes” which are not written to the flash. We compute
the ith “phantom syndrome” by adding up (binary addition)
the five bits in the ith column. Clearly S1, S2, S3, and S4
will be computed directly given user data, and S5, S6, and S7
will be a function of parity bits P1, P2, and P3. The resultant
syndrome [S1 S2 · · · S7] should be a valid codeword of the
rate 4/7 Hamming code. To satisfy this constraint, S5, S6, and
S7 will be as follows:
S5 = S1 + S2 + S3
S6 = S1 + S2 + S4
(1)
S7 = S1 + S3 + S4
Using S5, S6, S7, parity bits P1, P2, P3 are solved as:
P1 = S5 + U21 + U22 + U23 + U24
P2 = S5 + U25 + U26 + U27 + U28
(2)
P3 = S5 + U29 + U30 + U31 + U32
The extension of this example to other choices of C1 and C2
is straightforward. Given that CC is the inner code, the input
to the CC encoder is the LDPC code encoded bit sequence.
The CC encoder takes this input sequence and appends the
CC parity bits. The resultant CC codeword is then converted
to levels and written to the flash.
B. Classification-Code Decoder
The input to the CC decoder is the hard read sequence from
the flash. In the received sequence, for each LDPC codeword
there will be multiple CC codewords. The exact number of
codewords depends on the code parameters. The decoding
steps for a single CC codeword are as follows:
1) Compute the syndrome by multiplying the received CC
codeword with the parity-check matrix of CC.
2) If “t” or fewer chunks are in error, the syndrome will
point to the chunks that are in error. Clearly, the chunks
identified as being in error will have an odd number of
bit errors. In this case, we perform the following tasks:
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:35:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KAYNAK et al.: CLASSIFICATION CODES FOR SOFT INFORMATION GENERATION FROM HARD FLASH READS
895
Number of 
Chunks in error
“t” or less
“t+1”
“t+2” or 
more
Correctly 
identify chunks 
in error
Detect that CC 
codeword has t+1 
chunks in error
Misidentify 
chunks in error
NAND 
FLASH
CC Syndrome 
Computation
Hard reads 
from Flash
1) Bits in chunks identified to 
be in error get “weak” LLR 
2) the rest gets “strong” LLR
All bits get 
“don’t know” 
LLR
1) Bits in chunks identified to 
be in error get “weak” LLR .
2) The rest gets “strong” LLR
Fig. 3. Soft information generation
• In the chunks identified to be in error, all bits are
assigned “weak” reliability and the sign from the
original hard flash read is preserved.
• Bits in the remaining chunks are assigned “strong”
reliability with the same sign of the hard flash read.
3) If “t+1” chunks are in error, the syndrome implies that
“t+1” chunks are in error, without locating the chunks
that are in error. In this case, all bits in the CC codeword
are assigned “don’t know” reliability with hard flash
read sign.
4) If “t+2” or more chunks are in error, the syndrome
will incorrectly locate chunks and those chunks will be
treated the same as in case (2). As a result, some bits
will be assigned improper reliabilities. For example:
• Chunks marked to be in error: Bits in these chunks
are assigned “weak” reliability. This results in
“weak” LLR assignment to correct bits (ignoring
undetectable error events in C1).
• Remaining chunks: In some of these chunks, there
will be an odd number of bit errors. These erroneous
bits, as well as the remaining correct bits will be
assigned “strong” LLR
Incorrect LLR assignment to some bits will cause some per-
formance degradation. However, given that LLR assignment
does not change RBER, the performance degradation will be
small. Simulation results have verified this observation.
Soft information generation is also illustrated in Fig. 3
C. Guidelines for Classification-Code Parameter Selection
The following are some guidelines for the design of the
classification code and the trade-offs to make based on the
needs of the system under consideration:
1) CC does not change RBER. Hard read is preserved in
the LLR assignment.
2) All bits within a chunk are treated the same. For
instance, if a chunk is identified to be in error, all bits in
that chunk are assigned “weak” reliability even though
only a few odd number of bits are in error. Therefore, it
is better to have shorter chunks. However, shorter chunks
can be achieved if more ECC overhead is used for the
CC. Let’s consider the following two codes:
• Code 1
– C1: 25-bits single-parity code (n, k) = (25, 24)
– C2: 1-bit correcting 2-bits detecting Hamming
code (n, k) = (8, 4)
– CC: (n, k) = (200, 196), rate = 0.98 (2% over-
head)
• Code 2
– C1: 10-bits single-parity code (n, k) = (10, 9)
– C2: 1-bit correcting 2-bits detecting Hamming
code (n, k) = (8, 4)
– CC: (n, k) = (80, 76), rate = 0.95 (5% overhead)
The example given above shows the trade-off be-
tween smaller chunk sizes (implying a finer soft
information assignment) versus code rate. Given
that flash parts typically have fixed ECC budgets,
any extra overhead used for CC will lead to using
a higher-rate LDPC code which is the main error
correction code. Accordingly, the resultant RBER
performance will be worse. Our analysis has shown
that using 20-30% of the ECC budget for CC is a
good choice.
3) From a simplistic point of view, it is desirable to have
a larger “t” for C2 given a fixed CC rate. The effect of
this will be the increased codeword size for the resultant
code. Let’s consider the following two codes:
• Code 1:
– C1: 25-bits single-parity code (n, k) = (25, 24)
– C2: 1-bit correcting 2-bits detecting Hamming
code (n, k) = (8, 4)
– CC: (n, k) = (200, 196), rate = 0.98 (2% over-
head)
• Code 2:
– C1: 25-bits single-parity code (n, k) = (25, 24)
– C2: 3-bits correcting 4-bits detecting Golay code
(n, k) = (24, 12)
– CC: (n, k) = (600, 588), rate = 0.98 (2% over-
head)
Both codes have the same 2% ECC overhead. The first
code can identify one chunk in error and detect that
two chunks are in error per 200 bits (eight chunks of
25 bits). The second code can identify three chunks in
error and detect that four chunks are in error in 600
bits (24 chunks of 25 bits). Comparing these two codes,
we observe that second code is pooling ECC resources
and offering them in a larger codeword. Considering the
600 bits codeword of the second code as three sections
of 200 bits, the second code will perform better only
when one of the sections has two, three or four chunks
in error, and the total number of chunks in error is four
or fewer among 24 chunks. Our simulations have shown
that both codes perform similarly except for very high
RBERs at which ECC codeword error rates (CWERs)
are very high.
4) Given incorrect assignment of LLRs to bits in some
cases, selection of the LLR values for “weak,” “don’t
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:35:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
896
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 5, MAY 2014
know,” and “strong” is very critical to achieving good
performance. For the same ECC system, a bad selection
will lead to quite bad results. Our simulations have
shown that we should not be over-confident or over-
pessimistic in LLR assignment. In this study, we used
empirical/pre-determined LLR values that are not func-
tion of RBER. Alternatively, one can compute these
LLR values as a function of RBER using the prob-
abilities of “weak,” “strong” and “don’t know” LLR
assignments. This method is outlined in the next section.
The pros and cons of the proposed system include:
Pros:
1) The proposed scheme enables employment of turbo
equalization, i.e., the iterative exchange of extrinsic soft
information between CC and LDPC code decoders. For
practical systems, it is not power-efficient to employ
turbo equalization in the default operation mode. How-
ever, this ability is a powerful tool that can be exploited
for recovery schemes which are less power-constrained.
2) The CC decoder can provide an early metric for the
input RBER, which can be used to program the LDPC
code decoder differently (in terms of changing the de-
coder parameters) and to enable/disable some firmware
features.
3) Hardware implementation of the encoder/decoder of the
classification code will be quite power-efficient. This is
a desirable feature given that most flash devices have
very tight power budgets.
4) CC nicely complements any existing ECC solution with-
out a need for a major overhaul.
Cons:
• The major disadvantage is the slightly inferior ECC
performance when the LDPC code decoder can run a
high number of iterations. The ECC budget is fixed for
flash applications, and by using part of this ECC budget
for an error-location code (no error correction), we are
effectively reducing the ECC overhead for the main error-
correction code. However as will be shown later, at earlier
iteration points a higher rate LDPC code using coarse
soft information (generated by CC) performs better then a
lower rate LDPC code which uses the entire ECC budget.
V. ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the proposed coding scheme.
Let’s define the number of soft bits (NSoftBits) as base two
logarithm of the number of unique reliability values/regions
assuming hard decision value of zero or one is given. When
multiple reads (Nreads) are performed at flash, the number of
resultant soft bits can be computed as:
NSoftBits = log2(Nreads + 1) −1.
(3)
As an example, seven flash reads (eight reliability regions,
four for bit zero, four for bit one) result in one hard and two
soft bits, i.e., there are 22 = 4 unique reliability regions for
the hard decision of zero or one.
Assuming “weak”, “don’t know” and “strong” LLR values
are unique, classification code decoder assigns six distinct
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Vt distribution (RBER=4.0E−3)
Bucket/Reliability Region Number
Probability
 
 
Bit = 1
Bit = 0
Strong
Strong
Weak
Weak
Don’t
Know
Don’t
Know
Fig. 4. Conditional Vt distribution computed based on the CC constraint at
RBER=4.0E-3
LLRs to LDPC codeword bits (three for hard read of zero and
three for hard read of one). The amount of soft bits generated
by the proposed scheme has the following upper bound:
NSoftBits ≤log2(6) −1 = 1.585.
(4)
This is an upper bound due to the fact that LLR assignment
by CC decoder is done at the chunk level and every bit of the
chunk is assigned with the same reliability value.
From information theoretic point of view, the advantage of
the proposed coding scheme can be quantified by computing
the mutual information (MI) at the input of the LDPC code
decoder and comparing it with the case when CC decoder is
not used. For this purpose at various RBERs, CC decoder first
generates LLRs for a pool of LDPC codewords. Generated
LLRs are then used to assign the bits into the six buckets
mentioned earlier to compute the conditional Vt distributions.
We then use this information to compute the mutual infor-
mation for each LDPC codeword. Clearly, the resultant Vt
distribution is only a function of RBER and it is similar to the
Vt distribution obtained by making multiple flash reads. Fig. 4
shows the resultant conditional Vt distribution at an RBER
of 4.0E-3 when we use (n, k) = (200, 196), 2% CC that is
the tensor product of length 25 single parity code and 1-bit
correcting, 2-bits detecting Hamming code. In the figure, six
different reliability regions (buckets) between vertical dashed
lines are also marked. One can also use this Vt distribution to
compute RBER dependent “weak”, “strong” and “don’t know”
LLR values.
Across the RBER range of 1.0E-3 to 1.0E-2, Fig. 5 reports
average mutual information at the input of the LDPC code
decoder for three cases; namely (i) without CC (ii) with 2%
CC and (iii) with 5% CC. Although not shown in the figure,
for RBERs less than 1.0E-3, 2% and 5% classification codes
lead to similar average mutual information improvement. For
RBERs greater than 1.0E-3, 5% CC improves the MI more
compared to 2% CC. This is an expected result due to
the fact that as RBER increases the probability that two or
more chunks in error increases. Since these cases lead to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:35:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KAYNAK et al.: CLASSIFICATION CODES FOR SOFT INFORMATION GENERATION FROM HARD FLASH READS
897
10
−3
10
−2
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.98
RBER
Mutual Information (MI)
 
 
without CC
with rate=0.98 (2%) CC
with rate=0.95 (5%) CC
Fig. 5. Average MI at the input of the LDPC code decoder
inaccurate LLR assignments for 2% CC, the improvement of
CC decreases with increasing RBER as evident in Fig. 5. Even
though the MI improvements shown in Fig. 5 seem small, they
translate into better LDPC code performance as illustrated in
the next section.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the performance of the proposed classifica-
tion code is evaluated when used to generate soft information
for a 1KB LDPC code with code rate 0.88. The LDPC code
decoder is a fixed point decoder utilizing min-sum decoding
algorithm and decoder input LLRs are quantized. To generate
the coarse soft information, we use the following 2% overhead
classification code:
• C1: 25-bits single-parity code (n, k) = (25, 24)
• C2: 1-bit correcting 2-bits detecting Hamming code
(n, k) = (8, 4)
• CC: (n, k) = (200, 196), rate = 0.98 (2% overhead).
As described earlier, CC has a codeword size of 200 bits and
it is made of eight chunks of 25 bits. Each chunk corresponds
to the single-parity code. If a single chunk is in error, this
code can locate the chunk that is in error. It can also detect
that two chunks are in error without locating them.
In the decode path, based on hard flash reads, CC generates
coarse soft information which is used by the LDPC code
decoder as input LLRs. Hard decisions are produced after a
maximum number of decoder iterations that depends on the
power budget of the flash device.
Fig. 6 reports the codeword error rate performance of
the 12% LDPC code when used with and without 2% CC
for maximum decoder iterations of two, three, and 32. We
observe that, LDPC code aided by CC performs better and
the performance improvement is more pronounced when the
decoder iterates for a maximum of two or three times. As
an example, after three iterations at an approximate RBER of
3.7E-3, 12% LDPC code achieves a codeword error rate of
1.0E-5 when aided with CC. Without the CC, same CWER
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
RBER
CWER
 
 
Max iter=2, with CC
Max iter=3, with CC
Max iter=32, with CC
Max iter=2, without CC
Max iter=3, without CC
Max iter=32, without CC
Fig. 6. 12% LDPC code performance with/without 2% CC
10
−3
10
−2
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
RBER
Average Number of Decoder Iterations
 
 
without CC
with CC
10
−3
10
−2
2
3
4
5
RBER
 
 
Fig. 7. 12% LDPC code average number of decoder iterations as a function
of RBER
is achieved at an RBER of 2.8E-3. As LDPC code decoder
is allowed to iterate more, the performance improvement gets
smaller. We also note that the slope of the CWER vs. RBER
curve for the LDPC code is steeper when aided by the CC.
This is an added benefit of the generated soft information.
Power budget is usually very tight for majority of the appli-
cations using flash devices and LDPC code decoder is one of
the major contributors to flash controller power consumption.
A good measure of the decoder power consumption is the
average number of decoder iterations. In this context, we next
analyze the average number of decoder iterations as well as
the decoder iteration histogram. Fig. 7 reports the average
number of decoder iterations as a function of RBER. On
the upper right corner of the picture, we zoom into lower
RBER regions. Clearly, existence of soft information helps the
decoder to converge faster; even though CC decoder generates
only coarse reliability information. As an example, at an
average RBER of 2.5E-3, LDPC code decoder iterates for an
average of 2.47 without CC, and 2.06 with CC. For RBERs
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:35:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
898
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 5, MAY 2014
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Iteration
Iteration Histogram (Probability)
 
 
without CC
with CC
Fig. 8. 12% LDPC code decoder iteration histogram at an RBER of 5.2E-3
less than 5.0E-3, in average CC helps the decoder to iterate
16% less. As an added benefit of CC, faster convergence of the
LDPC code decoder translates into lower power consumption.
Decoder iteration histogram is reported in Fig. 8 for an
average RBER of 5.2E-3. Without CC approximately 45% of
the codewords require four iterations to correct the errors and
average number of iteration is 3.56. On the other hand with
CC, 12% of the codewords require four iterations and average
number of decoder iterations is 3.04.
Finally for a fixed ECC budget of 14%, we compare
performances of 12% LDPC code aided with 2% CC and 14%
LDPC code for a maximum of two, three and 32 decoder
iterations. Codeword error rate results presented in Fig. 9
show that investing 2% of the ECC budget for CC pays off
nicely for a maximum of two iterations. CWER performances
of the two ECC schemes are pretty close for three iterations
and beyond this point 14% LDPC code performs better. For
maximum decoder iterations of 32, 14% LDPC code CWER
performance is approximately 2 decades better and it achieves
a codeword error rate of 1.0E-5 at an approximate RBER
of 7.0E-3. On the other hand 12% LDPC code aided with
2% CC achieves the same CWER at an approximate RBER
of 6.0E-3. The observation that 14% LDPC code (with no
CC) performs better with sufficient decoder iterations is an
expected result because CC is only a location code and it does
not do any correction. On the other hand, LDPC code is a very
powerful error-correction code and extra 2% overhead makes
a difference. When LDPC code decoder is allowed to iterate a
sufficient number of times, it will lead to better performance.
Fig. 10 reports the average number of decoder iterations
for 12% LDPC code with 2% CC vs. 14% LDPC code. Up to
an average RBER of 5.0E-3, CC aided LDPC code requires
less decoder iterations. For RBERs higher than 5.5E-3, 14%
LPDC code ECC scheme requires less iterations. However
these higher RBERs are not the region of interest because of
the un-acceptably high UBERs. In actual systems, the flash
part is not cycled/retained to the point that RBER is this
high. In the RBER region of interest, coarse soft information
generated by CC helps LDPC code decoder to converge faster.
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
−6
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
RBER
CWER
 
 
Max iter=2, with CC
Max iter=3, with CC
Max iter=32, with CC
Max iter=2, without CC
Max iter=3, without CC
Max iter=32, without CC
Fig. 9. 12% LDPC code aided with 2% CC vs. 14% LDPC code in terms
of codeword error rate
0.001
0.002
0.005
0.007
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
RBER
Average Number of Decoder Iterations
 
 
without CC
with CC
Fig. 10. 12% LDPC code aided with 2% CC vs. 14% LDPC code in terms
of average number of decoder iterations
In addition to the results presented in this section, we
explored different code rates and codeword sizes for the LDPC
code and with the proposed coding scheme observed similar
benefits, i.e., enhanced RBER performance and faster decoder
convergence.
Based on the results presented in this section, use of the
proposed code becomes attractive when it is not feasible to run
many LDPC code decoder iterations, which is a realistic sce-
nario for various products that are power-constrained. Another
metric to consider is the read/write throughput from each flash
channel which has multiple dies sharing the same ECC encode
and decode engine. When LDPC code decoder is running a
high number of iterations, no other read operation can be
performed in that particular flash channel. This will result
in reduced read throughput. There exist flash applications
that do not have strict throughput or power constraints. For
these applications we can let LDPC code decoder to iterate
many times, therefore the proposed classification code may
not be very attractive for these applications. However, for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:35:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KAYNAK et al.: CLASSIFICATION CODES FOR SOFT INFORMATION GENERATION FROM HARD FLASH READS
899
other applications which have tight throughput and power
constraints, letting the LDPC code decoder to iterate many
times will have serious throughput and power implications. For
these applications the use of CC will be quite advantageous.
Furthermore, as discussed earlier in the paper, existence of
the CC enables turbo equalization schemes which have not
been explored in this paper. Iterative exchange of reliability
information between the CC and the LDPC code decoders
will further improve the performance. However this will have
power and throughput consequences, therefore it may be
considered only as a recovery scheme in case of ECC failure.
An additional advantage is that CC gives an estimate of
the codeword RBER. This information can be utilized by the
LDPC code decoder in terms of adjusting decoder parame-
ters such as min-sum scalars and offsets. Similarly, certain
firmware features can be enabled or disabled based on this
information.
We can conclude this section by mentioning that, the use
of CC will be attractive for several flash applications as CC
helps LDPC code decoder to converge faster and achieve better
CWER performance at earlier iteration points. Furthermore,
the complementing nature and the simplicity of the proposed
coding scheme provide a wide range of ECC possibilities that
can easily be tailored for the needs of a specific application.
Even though we considered LDPC code along with CC in this
paper, any error correction code with a decoder that can utilize
soft information can be used.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a tensor product-based classi-
fication code to generate coarse soft information based on
the hard flash reads for use in any soft information-utilizing
ECC decoder. The proposed code has very simple encoding
and decoding algorithms, making hardware implementation
practical. Simulation results have shown that with quite a small
ECC overhead, CC helps the LDPC code to achieve better
performance. CC also helps LDPC code decoder to converge
faster which is quite advantageous for power constrained
flash applications. Finally, iterative exchange of reliability
information between CC decoder and LDPC code decoder will
be a powerful recovery scheme.
REFERENCES
[1] Micron, “Micron Technology introduces industry’s smallest 128-gigabit
NAND flash device,” tech. rep., http://investors.micron.com/ releasede-
tail.cfm?releaseid=740322, Feb. 2013.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. M.I.T. Press., 1963.
[3] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision error-
correction codes in NAND flash memory,” Circuits and Systems I:
Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439,
2011.
[4] E. Yeo, “An LDPC-Enabled flash controller in 40nm CMOS,” in
Proceedings of 2012 Flash Memory Summit, 2012.
[5] Y. Maeda and H. Kaneko, “Error control coding for multilevel cell
flash memories using nonbinary low-density parity-check codes,” in
Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI Systems, 2009. DFT ’09. 24th IEEE
International Symposium on, pp. 367–375, 2009.
[6] S. Li and T. Zhang, “Improving multi-level NAND flash memory storage
reliability using concatenated BCH-TCM coding,” Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI) Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 18, no. 10,
pp. 1412–1420, 2010.
[7] J. Wang, T. Courtade, H. Shankar, and R. Wesel, “Soft information for
LDPC decoding in flash: Mutual-information optimized quantization,”
in Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 2011), 2011
IEEE, pp. 1–6, 2011.
[8] J. Wolf, “On codes derivable from the tensor product of check matrices,”
Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 281–284,
1965.
[9] J. Wolf and B. Elspas, “Error-locating codes–a new concept in error
control,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 113–117, 1963.
[10] J. Wolf, “An introduction to tensor product codes and applications to
digital storage systems,” in Information Theory Workshop, 2006. ITW
’06 Chengdu. IEEE, pp. 6–10, 2006.
Mustafa N. Kaynak received the B.Sc. degree from
Middle East Technical University in 1999, M.Eng.
degree from National University of Singapore in
2002, and Ph.D. degree from Arizona State Univer-
sity in 2005 all in Electrical Engineering. Between
November 2005 and August 2010 he worked at data
storage division of STMicroelectronics as a Staff
Engineer. Since September 2010 he has been with
NAND System Engineering department of Micron
Technology as a Sr. Staff Engineer. His research
interest areas are in signal processing and error
correction coding for data storage systems. Dr. Kaynak holds three issued
and ten pending US patents, and he published more than twenty journal and
conference papers.
Patrick R. Khayat received the B.S. degree in
computer engineering and the M.Eng. degree in
electrical engineering from the University of Cali-
fornia, San Diego, in 2000 and 2005, respectively.
From 2005 to 2010, he worked for STMicroelec-
tronics responsible for system design and analysis
of various ECC and signal processing techniques for
perpendicular magnetic recording disc drives. Also
in 2005, he joined the UC San Diego Extension
teaching Intro & Advanced Digital Signal Process-
ing courses. In 2010, he joined Micron Technology,
San Diego, California, as a Sr. Staff Engineer developing ECC and media
management techniques for flash memory controllers.
Sivagnanam Parthasarathy received the B.Sc de-
gree (with honors) in Electronics & Communication
Engineering from National Institute of Technology,
Kurukshetra, India & Graduate Certificate in Com-
munication Engineering from University of Califor-
nia, San Diego in 1983 and 2002 respectively. Since
September 2010, he has been with NAND Systems
Engineering department of Micron Technology as
a Distinguished Member of Technical Staff. Prior
to that he held position as a ST Fellow in ST
Microelectronics Inc., developing advanced super-
scalar architectures, signal processing algorithms and error correction coding
for data storage systems. He has been granted several patents in related fields
& has several pending applications.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:35:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
