IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

4427

Noise Predictive Belief Propagation
Mustafa N. Kaynak1, Student Member, IEEE, Tolga M. Duman1, Senior Member, IEEE, and Erozan M. Kurtas2, Member, IEEE
Department of Electrical Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-5706 USA Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA 15222-4215 USA
We introduce iterative noise whitening for belief-propagation-based channel detectors over intersymbol interference channels with correlated additive noise. In particular, we consider longitudinal magnetic recording systems. The proposed “noise predictive belief propagation” (NPBP) detector iteratively whitens the noise samples by modifying the edge probability computation. NPBP detectors based on finite impulse response and infinite impulse response prediction filters are developed. In addition, we introduce a novel prediction filter optimization method leading to a better noise whitening performance. Simulation results for both coded and uncoded systems show that significant improvements can be obtained.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, channel detection, longitudinal recording channels, noise prediction.

I. INTRODUCTION
I NTERSYMBOL interference (ISI) channels are encountered in many applications, including magnetic recording and wireless communications. To recover ISI channel inputs, usually maximum a posteriori (MAP) and Viterbi algorithm based channel bit detectors are used. More recently, the belief propagation (BP) algorithm has been proposed for this purpose as well [1], [2]. When the factor graph of the ISI channel is length 4 cycle free, BP gives a performance similar to the optimal MAP detector, while it has the advantage of having parallel structure resulting in more efficient and fast hardware implementations.
However, over ISI channels with correlated noise, channel detectors assuming additive white Gaussian noise for computing the branch/edge probabilities are not optimal. For instance, magnetic recording channels equalized to a partial response (PR) target have correlated noise due to the linear equalizer used to shape the channel impulse response.
Over ISI channels with correlated additive noise, a trivial way to improve the channel detector performance is to whiten the noise. For instance, in [3] and [4], noise predictive maximum likelihood (NPML) detection is proposed by modifying the branch metric computation of the ML detector using a finite impulse response (FIR) prediction filter and the “tentative” hard decisions from the surviving path of each state. In [5], NPML detectors based on FIR prediction filters, with varying complexity, are proposed for recording channels. Moreover in [6], NPML detection based on infinite impulse response (IIR) filters is proposed to match the performance of the long FIR prediction filters proposed in [4]. In [7], Kavcic studied softoutput detectors for channels with intersymbol interference and Markov noise memory as well. In general, NPML detectors utilizing both FIR and IIR filters improve the performance over the recording channels significantly [3]–[6].
In this paper, we extend the belief propagation algorithm by employing noise prediction and propose noise predictive belief propagation detectors to iteratively whiten the additive noise

over ISI channels with correlated noise. We consider noise predictive belief propagation (NPBP) detectors utilizing FIR or IIR prediction filters. The proposed detector is a soft-input softoutput (SISO) algorithm, which is very advantageous especially for the coded systems.
The fundamental difference between NPML and NPBP detection is the type of decision feedback. For NPBP detection, because of BP’s parallel structure, the decision feedback is global, that is, at a particular NPBP iteration only the information from the previous iterations are used. As a result, the NPBP detector has a parallel structure and the global decision feedback facilitates the parallel implementation leading to fast and memory efficient implementations. However for NPML detector, the decision feedback is local due to the serial structure of ML detection. That is, at a particular time instant noise prediction information from the previous steps are used. This type of local decision feedback requires the serial structure and it prevents the parallel implementations.
Over longitudinal magnetic recording channels, we show that the proposed detector effectively whitens the additive noise and improves the bit-error-rate (BER) performance significantly, outperforming both BP and MAP detectors when noise prediction is not performed. The complexity does not increase significantly as well. In addition, the performance improvement is preserved when an outer error correcting code (ECC) is employed.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the system model is given. In Section III, factor graphs and the belief propagation algorithm are briefly presented. In Section IV, the noise predictive belief propagation detector is introduced. In Section V, a novel prediction filter optimization method is presented and in Section VI simulation results are reported for both uncoded and coded systems. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section VII.
II. SYSTEM MODEL

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.857101

We consider a communication scheme through an ISI channel with correlated additive noise. The block diagram of the system, including an ECC, is shown in Fig. 1.

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the coded system.
The information bit sequence is first encoded by an outer ECC and the coded bits are bit-interleaved using a pseudorandom interleaver to obtain the interleaved coded bit sequence
, which is modulated using binary PAM and then transmitted through the channel. For the case of a random low-density parity check (LDPC) code, interleaving may not be necessary. Thus, the channel output is given as

(1)
Fig. 2. Factor graph of the PR4 channel.

where

is the channel impulse response length, is the

correlated additive noise, and ’s are the channel coefficients.

At the receiver, in order to remove the effects of the ISI, a

SISO channel detector is employed. The channel detector com-

putes the log likelihood ratios (LLRs) of the ISI channel inputs,

which are first de-interleaved and then passed to the outer de-

coder. By taking the code constraints into account, the outer de-

coder computes the LLRs of the codewords and then passes this

information back to the channel detector after interleaving. The

LLRs from the outer decoder are used as the a priori informa-

tion by the channel detector to compute the new LLRs, which

are passed to the outer decoder to complete one full iteration.

Clearly, only the extrinsic LLR information is exchanged be-

tween the decoder and the channel detector. The decoder itera-

tions are performed until a maximum number of iterations and

then the information bits are recovered.

the cycles of the factor graph are short, the BP detector achieves a very good performance [8]. In fact, although the factor graphs of the LDPC codes usually have cycles that are not short, the iterative belief propagation decoder leads to a very good, capacity approaching performance [10], [11].
The BP algorithm, which is used to decode the LDPC codes, is commonly employed in the artificial intelligence community and it is also known as the “message passing” or the “sumproduct” algorithm [12]. BP represents a broad set of decoding algorithms and the original turbo decoding algorithm is shown to be a special case [13]. Compared to the trellis-based algorithms, the main advantage of the belief propagation algorithm is that it can be implemented in parallel when the “flooding schedule” is employed [8]. Therefore, it is very useful for practical implementation purposes, e.g., reducing the computation time considerably. Furthermore, the BP algorithm achieves the

III. FACTOR GRAPHS AND BELIEF PROPAGATION

optimal MAP performance if the factor graph is cycle free and near optimal performance if the cycles are not short [12].

In addition to a trellis representation, the input–output rela- Another advantage is experienced when a random outer

tionship of an ISI channel also has a factor graph representa- LDPC code is employed over ISI channels. For this case, by

tion [1]. For instance, Fig. 2 shows the factor graph of the PR4 employing a BP-based decoder/detector working on the joint

channel having an impulse response of

. In the factor graph of the code and the channel, we can jointly decode

factor graph, the circle shaped “variable nodes” at the top repre- the LDPC code and detect the ISI channel. The implementation

sent the channel inputs and the triangle-shaped “function nodes” of the joint decoder/detector on a single chip might be very

at the bottom represent the channel outputs. An edge between practical, as it reduces the computational complexity and the

these nodes represents a conditional dependency. For example, memory requirements significantly because of the parallel

since

for the PR4 channel, variable nodes structure of the belief propagation algorithm.

2 and 4 are connected to function node 4. In a factor graph, a BP is an iterative algorithm based on the information ex-

“cycle” refers to a loop starting and ending at the same node. change between the variable and the function nodes [9]. The

The PR4 channel factor graph shown in Fig. 2 is cycle free. algorithm works briefly as follows. At the first half of each it-

If the factor graph is cycle free, it yields a “propagation tree” eration, function nodes calculate the a posteriori probabilities

and over this factor graph the belief propagation algorithm com- for the connected variable nodes, using the extrinsic a priori in-

putes the exact a posteriori probability correctly [8], [9]. On the formation passed from the connected variable nodes as well as

other hand, when there are cycles in the factor graph, the mes- the channel output and the ISI channel constraints. Then, at the

sages passed in the BP algorithm are correlated and this correla- second half of the iteration, the variable nodes update their a

tion may prevent the BP detector from converging to the optimal priori information based on the a posteriori information passed

performance, as the BP detector assumes that the messages ex- from the connected function nodes and transfer (propagate) this

changed between the variable and function nodes are not corre- updated extrinsic a priori information to the connected function

lated [1]. However, through simulations it is shown that, unless nodes. After a number of iterations, the bit decisions are made.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAYNAK et al.: NOISE PREDICTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION

4429

IV. NOISE PREDICTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION
Noise prediction is originally proposed for maximum likelihood detection using the Viterbi algorithm. The idea is to whiten the correlated noise samples by exploiting the “tentative decisions” at the surviving path of each state. For noise whitening, FIR and IIR prediction filters are proposed. The details of NPML detection can be found in [3], [4], [6], [14].
In the following sections, we extend the BP algorithm to NPBP detection by utilizing FIR or IIR prediction filters. We also discuss some important implementation issues.

A. NPBP Detection With FIR Prediction Filters

For the system under consideration, the ISI channel output,

, corresponding to the recording channel input is given in

(1) as

, where is the correlated

additive noise.

Noise prediction (NP) for belief propagation is performed as

follows. At the end of a particular BP iteration, hard bit decisions

are made to obtain . Then this sequence is used to compute

the corresponding tentative ISI channel output

. Let

represent

the transfer polynomial of a length FIR noise prediction filter.

Then, assuming error-free decision feedback, the total distortion

component for the whitened channel output is given as

(2)

the decision feedback, the whitened noise sample given in (2) is more accurately expressed as

(5)

where

is the

bit

error. We note that, by setting

, (5) simplifies to (2).

The effect of the bit errors is to increase the noise variance and

hence cause error propagation. To solve the problem, we use a

thresholding approach. That is, if error propagation occurs, it is

very likely that

results in a high value. Therefore,

if the difference is higher than a threshold, it can be truncated.

Another method is to switch to a shorter prediction filter, if the

threshold constraint is violated. Both methods yield almost iden-

tical results.

The main difference between NPML and NPBP detection is

that the decision feedback is local for NPML detection, i.e.,

and are state dependent. However for NPBP detection, the

decision feedback is global, i.e., there is only a single whitened

channel output for all bit nodes. The global feedback is a

result of BP’s parallel structure and it facilitates the parallel im-

plementation leading to fast and memory-efficient implementa-

tions.

The length FIR predictor filter coefficients are optimized

using the “normal equations” as follows [6]:

where

represents the ideal ISI

channel output calculated from the tentative bit decisions. is

also known as the prediction error. Equation (2) illustrates that

through noise prediction we can reduce the noise power of the

original noise sample . If the total whitened portion of the

additive noise is defined as

(3)

then the whitened channel output is given by

(4)

(6)

where

is the autocorrelation of the total distortion .

B. NPBP Detection With IIR Prediction Filters

In [6], IIR noise prediction filters are used to achieve the per-

formance of the NPML detector utilizing long FIR prediction

filters. The motivation is to approximate long FIR prediction fil-

ters with short IIR filters.

For NPBP detection we consider a single pole IIR predic-

tion filter, as it leads to the best performance among many IIR

filters we simulated. Let

, be

the -transform of the single pole IIR prediction filter. Then,

assuming error-free decision feedback, the -transform of the

whitened noise sequence is given as

After the whitened channel output is obtained, at the fol-

lowing iterations the new whitened sequence is used for the

(7)

edge probability (a posteriori probability) computations of the

BP algorithm. Since BP is an iterative algorithm, NP can be re- where

represents the colored noise sequence and

peated at later iterations with more accurate bit decisions. This denotes its predicted value through the single pole prediction

and other implementation issues are discussed at the end of the filter. In time domain,

satisfies

section.

While using longer prediction filters for noise whitening,

caution must be exercised, because longer prediction filters are

(8)

more vulnerable to error propagation. Since longer filters use

more noise samples, a single bit error among the samples For the edge probability computation of the BP algorithm,

used for noise prediction may result in error propagation, which

is used as the whitened noise sample. The deriva-

can be explained as follows. In the presence of the bit errors in tion of the IIR prediction filter coefficients is given in [6].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005
TABLE I COMPUTATION OF THE WHITENED CHANNEL OUTPUT BY THE NPBP DETECTOR USING FIR AND IIR NOISE PREDICTION FILTERS

For the two prediction filters considered for NPBP detection, the computation of the whitened channel output is summarized in Table I, where ’s are FIR prediction filter coefficients and
’s and ’s are the zeros and the poles of the IIR prediction filter, respectively.

C. NPBP Detection Implementation Issues

Regarding the NPBP detection, there exist some important

implementation issues arising from its parallel and iterative

structure. One issue is which iteration to start the noise predic-

tion. In order to avoid error propagation caused by the incorrect

decision feedback, the hard decisions should be very accurate.

Therefore, the first NP step should be performed after the BP

detector converges. For instance, BP detector converges after

approximately ten iterations for the PR4 channel.

Another implementation issue is the frequency of the NP

steps. Our simulation results have shown that NP should be

performed at every five to ten iterations, instead of every

iteration, as it usually takes five iterations for the BP detector

to converge following each NP step. Regarding the number

of NP steps, the first three to four NP steps improve the BER

performance significantly and after that, additional NP steps

improve the performance very little. Therefore, it is sufficient

to perform NP steps 3–4 times.

It is essential to determine the reference channel output that

will be used at each NP step. At the first NP step, the whitened

channel output sequence is obtained by

, where

is calculated using (3) or (8). At the second NP step, the original

channel output is still used as the reference, not the whitened

channel output obtained in the previous step. The reason

is that the predictor coefficients are calculated from the auto-

correlation of the original total distortion . Following each

NP step, tentative decisions become more accurate, resulting

in more effective noise prediction. Therefore, the BER perfor-

mance improves.

The operation of the NPBP detector is illustrated in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. Block diagram of noise predictive belief propagation.
sion feedback into account. As expected, these prediction filters lead to a better performance compared to the filters obtained assuming the correct decision feedback using (6). To illustrate the idea, we consider the PR4 channel. For this case, the noise sample of the whitened channel output is given as

(9)

where Assuming
values them as as

is the

th bit error.

are discrete random variables taking

with probabilities

and renaming

, (9) can be rewritten

(10)

where and
We would like to minimize

. , thus

(11)

V. PREDICTION FILTER DESIGN IN THE PRESENCE

where

OF BIT ERRORS

(12) For noise whitening, in order to predict the noise samples,

bit decisions obtained at the end of a particular BP iteration are used. The bit decisions are mostly correct; however, some

Inserting (12) into (11) and setting

to zero, we obtain

bit errors may still exist. Although this is the case, the tradi-

(13)

tional prediction filter optimization method given by (6) as-

sumes error-free decision feedback, which is not accurate for After various steps and assuming

NPBP detection.

becomes

In this section, we propose a novel method to optimize the

is zero mean, (13)

prediction filter coefficients by taking the bit errors in the deci-

(14)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAYNAK et al.: NOISE PREDICTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION

4431

Fig. 4. BER performance for BP, BCJR, and NPBP detection with the N = 1 Fig. 5. BER performance for NPBP detection (N = 1 FIR filter) over D =

FIR filter over D = 2:86 recording channel equalized to the PR4 target.

2:86 recording channel equalized to the PR4 target with regard to NP steps.

where

. If we further as- channel. Clearly,

depends on the recording

sume that and are independent, the prediction filter coef- density [15].

ficients are obtained by solving

In Fig. 4, the BER performance of the BP detector is shown.

For comparison, we also include the performance of the MAP (15) detector implemented using the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv

(BCJR) algorithm [16]. Since the factor graph of the PR4

By setting

, (15) simplifies to (6). Thus, our method is a channel is cycle free, the BP detector converges to the MAP

generalization of the traditional approach. Clearly, the proposed performance after approximately ten iterations.

method requires an estimate of the BER we are operating at, due However, the BCJR detector performance shown in Fig. 4 is

to the term in (15), and this value can be easily calculated not optimal, as it does not take the noise correlation into account.

through training.

Prediction filters optimized using (15) lead to a better per-

formance. For instance, over normalized density

longitudinal recording channel equalized to the PR4 target, at

a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 9 dB, length 1 prediction filter

optimized using (15) leads to a BER of 7.9 10 , whereas the

filter optimized assuming error-free decision feedback results in

. Similarly at

dB, the two predic-

tors lead to

and

, respec-

tively. Hence, the proposed method results in better performing

prediction filters especially at low SNRs, where the number of

bit errors in the decision feedback increases.

The BER performance can be improved significantly through

noise prediction. Fig. 4 also shows the performance of the NPBP

detector employing a length one

FIR prediction filter

optimized using (15) by taking the bit errors in the decision

feedback into account. NP is done at BP iterations {15, 20, 25,

30} and a total of 35 iterations are performed. Compared to the

BP algorithm, NPBP detector improves the BER performance

approximately 0.8 dB at

.

For the

FIR prediction filter based NPBP detector,

Fig. 5 shows the BER performance with respect to the NP steps.

The BER improves after each NP step for the first 4 times, as

following the NP steps, the correlation among the noise samples

as well as the noise variance decrease. After that, the noise is

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS

almost white, therefore additional NP steps do not improve the performance much.

In this section, we report simulation results of NPBP detec- At each NP step, there are bit errors in the decision feed-

tion utilizing FIR or IIR prediction filters for both coded and un- back. Therefore, we do not have access to all noise samples

coded systems. In particular, we consider the longitudinal mag- and these errors may cause error propagation. In Fig. 6, the per-

netic recording channel at two different normalized densities, formance of the NPBP detector is shown if error-free decision

and

. Since the recording channel has feedback is used. For

prediction filter, error propaga-

a very long ISI span, in order to reduce the complexity of the tion causes around 0.3–0.4 dB performance loss compared to

channel detector, the channel is first equalized to the PR4 target the case when the decision feedback is error free. In the figure,

by using a 20-tap linear equalizer. For this case, the correlated correct feedback results for

and

prediction filters

noise given in (1) is composed of the additive white noise are also shown. These results illustrate that if the decision feed-

filtered by the linear equalizer plus the residual interference. back is error free, NPBP detector can potentially achieve more

The signal-to-noise ratio is defined as

than 3 dB gain, which is consistent with the results reported for

, where is the code rate,

the NPML detection in [4]. However, due to the errors in the

is the two-sided additive white Gaussian noise power spectral decision feedback, the NPBP detector cannot achieve the per-

density, and

is the dipulse response of the recording formance for the case of error-free decision feedback.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

Fig. 6. BER performance for NPBP detection with correct decision feedback over D = 2:86 recording channel equalized to the PR4 target.

Fig. 7. BER performance for NPBP detection with the N = 1; N = 2 FIR and single pole IIR filters over D = 2:86 recording channel equalized to the
PR4 target.

TABLE II
STATISTICS OF THE WHITENED NOISE FOR ERROR-FREE DECISION FEEDBACK, SNR = 14 dB

For error-free decision feedback, Table II reports the noise

statistics (in terms of the noise autocorrelation ) if different

length FIR prediction filters are used. Clearly, using longer pre-

diction filters results in more accurate noise whitening. For in-

stance, a length 4 prediction filter leads to almost white additive

noise. Thus, NPBP detector effectively whitens the noise and

improves the BER performance.

The result for

FIR prediction filter is shown in Fig. 7.

Compared to the length one prediction filter,

filter intro-

duces an additional 0.4 dB improvement, resulting in an overall

Fig. 8. BER performance for NPBP detection with the N = 1 FIR filter over D = 2:86 recording channel equalized to the PR4 target in the presence of
various levels of media noise.

improvement of 1.2 dB compared to the BP detector. Fig. 7

also shows the performance of the NPBP detector utilizing a The results in Figs. 8 and 9 show that when the media noise

single-pole IIR prediction filter. For this case, the single-pole level is high, the detector performance degrades significantly

IIR filter performs slightly better than the

FIR filter and at both recording densities. However, compared to the BP de-

0.2 dB worse than the

prediction filter.

tector which is not employing the noise predictive techniques,

In magnetic recording systems, other than the electronic the proposed NPBP detector improves the performance even in

noise, media noise (jitter) is also present. Variations in the the presence of media noise. For instance, the NPBP detector

width and the position of the transition pulse of the recording performance at 3% media noise is better than the performance of

channel as well as the other channel imperfections result the BP detector operating at 0% media noise for both

in the media noise [17]. The media noise is modeled as a and

. We also note that the media noise is signal

random shift in the position of the transition position. The (pattern) dependent. Therefore, using a single prediction filter

shift is a a zero mean Gaussian random variable with variance for all patterns does not lead to the best possible performance.

, where is the symbol period and is the One might alternatively employ different prediction filters for

media noise level expressed in terms of the percentage. If the different patterns to further improve the detector performance

random shift exceeds half of the bit period , it is truncated. [18].

We also evaluated the performance of the NPBP detector We also study a coded system, where an outer

employing a length one FIR predictor filter in the presence of random LDPC code is used over

and

various media noise levels over

and

longitudinal recording channels equalized to

recording channels equalized to the PR4 target.

the PR4 target. In particular, we consider (

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAYNAK et al.: NOISE PREDICTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION

4433

Fig. 9. BER performance for NPBP detection with the N = 1 FIR filter over D = 2:00 recording channel equalized to the PR4 target in the presence of
various levels of media noise.

Fig. 11. BER performance of the L = 1010; R = 0:7 (code 1) and L = 1107; R = 0:89 (code 2) LDPC codes over D = 2:00 recording channel
equalized to the PR4 target.

utilizing a BP detector achieves approximately 2.8 dB coding

gain. If an

FIR prediction filter is used, then the overall

coding gain is around 3.3 dB.

Since the lower rate code is very powerful, improvement of-

fered by the NPBP detector is smaller. However, the higher rate

code is not as powerful, therefore, performing noise prediction

at the channel detector leads to higher BER improvement. Since

higher rate codes are preferred for recording channels, using

NPBP detection is very advantageous.

We also evaluated the performance of the proposed detector

over a lower recording density

channel equalized

to the PR4 target. For this case, the target is a better match of

the actual channel; therefore, there is less correlation among

the noise samples. The simulation results for both uncoded and

coded systems utilizing the two LDPC codes used for the higher

recording density system are shown in Fig. 11.

Compared to the uncoded BP performance, the lower rate

Fig. 10. BER performance of the L = 1010; R = 0:7 (code 1) and L = 1107; R = 0:89 (code 2) LDPC codes over D = 2:86 recording channel
equalized to the PR4 target.

code (

, code 1) introduces approximately 4 dB coding

gain if a BP detector is used. For the higher rate code (

, code 2), compared to the uncoded BP detection, the coding

gain is 3.6 dB if a BP-based channel detector is used. Instead,

)

(code 1) and if an

FIR prediction based NPBP detector is used,

(code the overall coding gain is around 3.8 dB. Hence, the perfor-

2) regular, systematic LDPC codes,1 where

and

mance offered by the NPBP detector is preserved even at lower

denote the numbers of coded, information, and the parity check recording densities, where the noise correlation is not very high.

bits, respectively. is the code rate and and are the

column and the row weights. Fig. 10 shows the simulation

results for both codes as well as the uncoded results over

recording channel.

As expected, the outer codes introduce significant coding

gains. At

, for the lower rate code (

, code

1), the coding gain is 3.8 dB with the BP detector, compared

to BP detection for the uncoded case. The

FIR filter

When LDPC codes are used over recording channels, although very low BERs are achieved, the LDPC decoder may cause burst errors. That is, although most of the transmitted blocks are decoded correctly, the incorrectly decoded blocks may possibly contain a large number of bit errors [19]. Such errors pose challenging problems for various applications including magnetic recording systems because the outer ECC cannot correct the residual errors if they exceed its error

based NPBP detector introduces an additional 0.4 dB gain, correction capability. Therefore, it is standard in magnetic leading to an overall coding gain of 4.2 dB. For the higher rate recording literature to study the error bursts and the error event

code (

, code 2), at

, the coded system distributions to evaluate the performance of the system [20].

0 1For both of the codes M > L K, which means that the randomly generated
parity check matrices of both codes are not full rank, i.e., some of the parity
check equations are redundant.

The burst error statistics of the

LDPC

code over

recording channel equalized to the PR4

target is shown in Fig. 12 at an approximate BER of

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

Conference on Communications (ICC’05), Seoul, Korea, May 2005 [22]. Part of this work was performed while the second author was on a sabbatical leave at Bilkent University, Turkey.

Fig. 12. Error statistics of the L = 1010; R = 0:7 LDPC code over D =
2 2:00 recording channel equalized to the PR4 target at an approximate BER of
5:7 10 .

For this case, the proposed NPBP detector employing a length

one FIR predictor filter is used for channel detection and out of

the

blocks simulated, 1365 of them had bit errors.

The burst error statistics is relatively compact and 98% of the

incorrectly decoded blocks have less than ten bit errors. If an

outer algebraic ECC (such as a Reed–Solomon (RS) code) that

can correct at most ten bit errors is employed in conjunction

with the inner LDPC code, very low bit/frame error rates can be

achieved. Furthermore, one might used the methods proposed in

[21] to identify the blocks that may possibly cause burst errors.

For our examples we used the PR4 channel as the target, be-

cause its factor graph has no cycles, hence BP performs well.

We also simulated other targets, such as general partial response

(GPR) targets, and observed similar performance improvements

when noise prediction is employed. However, for some targets

the BP performance may degrade due to the short cycles in the

channel factor graph, but noise prediction will still improve the

performance.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced noise predictive belief propagation utilizing FIR and IIR prediction filters. We showed that the proposed NPBP based channel detector improves the performance significantly for both uncoded and coded systems over magnetic recording channels at various normalized densities. The performance improvement is preserved in the presence of the media noise as well. In addition, the parallel and iterative structure of the NPBP detector leads to efficient and fast hardware implementations. We have also developed a novel predictor filter optimization method by taking bit errors into account. The proposed method results in better performing noise prediction filters. We can thus conclude that the proposed NPBP detector is very effective to whiten the noise and improve the performance over ISI channels with correlated noise. Moreover, extensions of the NPBP detection scheme is possible if pattern dependent noise prediction methods are employed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by a grant from Seagate Technology, and it was presented in part at the IEEE International

REFERENCES

[1] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing

decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.

[2] G. Colavolpe and G. Germi, “Simple iterative detection schemes for

ISI channels,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics,

Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 283–286.

[3] P. R. Chevillat, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Maiwald, “Noise-predictive par-

tial-response equalizers and applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Com-

munications (ICC), vol. 2, Jun. 1992, pp. 942–947.

[4] E. Eleftheriou and W. Hirt, “Improving performance of PRML/EPRML

through noise prediction,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 22, no. 5, pp.

3968–3970, Sep. 1996.

[5]

, “Noise-predictive maximum-likelihood (NPML) detection for the

magnetic recording channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications

(ICC), vol. 1, Jun. 1996, pp. 556–560.

[6] J. D. Coker, E. Eleftheriou, R. L. Galbraith, and W. Hirt, “Noise-predic-

tive maximum likelihood (NPML) detection,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol.

34, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Jan. 1998.

[7] A. Kavcic, “Soft-output detector for channels with intersymbol interfer-

ence and Markov noise memory,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communica-

tions Conf. (GLOBECOM), vol. 1B, 1999, pp. 728–732.

[8] F. R. Kschischang and B. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes

by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.

[9] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and

the the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2,

pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.

[10] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the de-

sign of low-density parity check coded within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon

limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[11] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity ap-

proaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[12] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. San Mateo,

CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[13] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as

an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[14] R. D. Cideciyan, J. D. Coker, E. Eleftheriou, and R. L. Galbraith, “Noise

predictive maximum likelihood detection combined with parity-based

post-processing,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 714–720, Mar.

2001.

[15] J. G. Proakis, “Equalization techniques for high density magnetic

recording systems,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., no. 4, pp. 73–82, Jul.

1998.

[16] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear

codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.

IT-20, no. 2, pp. 248–287, Mar. 1974.

[17] J. Moon and L. R. Carley, “Detection performance in the presence of

transition noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2172–2174,

Sep. 1990.

[18] J. Moon and J. Park, “Pattern-dependent noise prediction in signal de-

pendent noise,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 730–743,

Apr. 2001.

[19] M. N. Kaynak, T. M. Duman, and E. M. Kurtas, “Burst error identifica-

tion for turbo and LDPC coded systems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo

Codes and Related Topics, Sep. 2003, pp. 515–518.

[20] T. Souvignier, “Turbo decoding for partial response channels,” Ph.D.

thesis, Dept. Elect. Eng., Univ. California, San Diego, 1999.

[21] M. N. Kaynak, T. M. Duman, and E. M. Kurtas, “Burst error identifi-

cation for turbo and LDPC coded magnetic recording systems,” IEEE

Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3087–3089, Jul. 2004.

[22]

, “Noise belief propagation,” in Proc IEEE Int. Conf. Communica-

tions, vol. 1, May 2005, pp. 704–708.

Manuscript received November 25, 2004; revised August 22, 2005 (e-mail: mustafa.kaynak@asu.edu).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

