4216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

Density Evolution for Asymmetric Memoryless Channels
Chih-Chun Wang, Sanjeev R. Kulkarni, Fellow, IEEE, and H. Vincent Poor, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Density evolution (DE) is one of the most powerful analytical tools for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and graph codes with message passing decoding algorithms. With channel symmetry as one of its fundamental assumptions, density evolution has been widely and successfully applied to different channels, including binary erasure channels (BECs), binary symmetric channels (BSCs), binary additive white Gaussian noise (BiAWGN) channels, etc. This paper generalizes density evolution for asymmetric memoryless channels, which in turn broadens the applications to general memoryless channels, e.g., z-channels, composite white Gaussian noise channels, etc. The central theorem underpinning this generalization is the convergence to perfect projection for any fixed-size supporting tree. A new iterative formula of the same complexity is then presented and the necessary theorems for the performance concentration theorems are developed. Several properties of the new density evolution method are explored, including stability results for general asymmetric memoryless channels. Simulations, code optimizations, and possible new applications suggested by this new density evolution method are also provided. This result is also used to prove the typicality of linear LDPC codes among the coset code ensemble when the minimum check node degree is sufficiently large. It is shown that the convergence to perfect projection is essential to the belief propagation (BP) algorithm even when only symmetric channels are considered. Hence, the proof of the convergence to perfect projection serves also as a completion of the theory of classical density evolution for symmetric memoryless channels.
Index Terms—Asymmetric channels, density evolution (DE), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, rank of random matrices, sum–product algorithms, z-channels.

I. INTRODUCTION

S INCE the advent of turbo codes [1] and the rediscovery of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2], [3] in the

mid 1990s, graph codes [4] have attracted significant attention

because of their capacity-approaching error correcting capa-

bility and the inherent low-complexity ( or

,

where is the codeword length) of message passing decoding

algorithms [3]. The near-optimal performance of graph codes is

Manuscript received August 15, 2003; revised August 22, 2005. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCR9980590 and CCR-0312413, the Army Research Laboratory Communications Technology Alliance under Contract DAAD19-01-2-0011, the Army Research Office under Contract DAAD19-00-1-0466, and the New Jersey Center for Pervasive Information Technologies. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 3rd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, September 1–5, 2003, and in part at the 39th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Baltimore, MD, March 16–18, 2005.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA (e-mail: chihw@princeton.edu; kulkarni@ princeton.edu; poor@princeton.edu).
Communicated by G. Zémor, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.858931

generally based on pseudorandom interconnections and Pearl’s belief propagation (BP) algorithm [5], which is a distributed message-passing algorithm efficiently computing a posteriori probabilities in cycle-free inference networks. Turbo codes can also be viewed as a variation of LDPC codes, as discussed in [3] and [6].
Due to their simple arithmetic structure, completely parallel decoding algorithms, excellent error correcting capability [7], and acceptable encoding complexity [8], [9], LDPC codes have been widely and successfully applied to different channels, including binary erasure channels (BECs) [10]–[12], binary symmetric channels (BSCs), binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channels (BiAWGNCs) [3], [13], Rayleighfading channels [14], Markov channels [15], partial response channels/intersymbol interference channels [16]–[19], and bitinterleaved coded modulation [21]. Except for the finite-length analysis of LDPC codes over the BEC [22], the analysis of iterative message-passing decoding algorithms is asymptotic (when the block length tends to infinity) [13], [23]. Under the optimal maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding algorithm, both the finite-length analysis and the asymptotic analysis for LDPC codes and other ensembles of turbo-like codes become tractable and rely on the weight distribution of these ensembles (see, e.g., [24]–[26]). Various Gallager-type bounds on ML decoders for different finite LDPC code ensembles have been established in [27].
In essence, the density evolution method proposed by Richardson et al. in [13] is an asymptotic analytical tool for LDPC codes. As the codeword length tends to infinity, the random codebook will be more and more likely to be cycle free, under which condition the input messages of each node are independent. Therefore, the probability density of messages passed can be computed iteratively. A performance concentration theorem and a cycle-free convergence theorem, providing the theoretical foundation of the density evolution method, are proved in [13]. The behavior of codes with block length
is well predicted by this technique, and thus degree optimization for LDPC codes becomes tractable. Near optimal LDPC codes have been found in [7] and [23]. In [16], Kavcˇic´ et al. generalized the density evolution method to intersymbol interference channels, by introducing the ensemble of coset codes, i.e., the parity-check equations are randomly selected as even or odd parities. Kavcˇic´ et al. also proved the corresponding fundamental theorems for the new coset code ensemble.
Because of the symmetry of the BP algorithm and the symmetry of parity-check constraints in LDPC codes, the decoding error probability will be independent of the transmitted

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4217

codeword in the symmetric channel setting. Thus, in [13], an

all-zero transmitted codeword is assumed and the probability

density of the messages passed depends only on the noise

distribution. Nevertheless, in symbol-dependent asymmetric

channels, which are the subject of this paper, the noise distribution is codeword dependent, and thus, some codewords are Fig. 1. A realization of the code ensemble C (2; 3).

more noise resistant than others. As a result, the all-zero code-

word cannot be assumed. Instead of using a larger coset code ensemble as in [16], we circumvent this problem by averaging over all valid codewords, which is straightforward and has practical interpretations as the averaged error probability. Our

received signal, respectively, taking values in

and the

reals, respectively. The channel is memoryless and is specified

by the conditional probability density function

results apply to all binary input, memoryless, symbol-depen-

dent channels (e.g., z-channels, binary asymmetric channels

(BASCs), composite binary-input white Gaussian noise chan-

nels (composite BiAWGNCs), etc.) and can be generalized Two common examples are as follows.

to LDPC codes over

or [28]–[30]. The theorem of

convergence to perfect projection is provided to justify this Example 1: [Binary Asymmetric Channels (BASC)]

codeword-averaged approach in conjunction with the existing

theorems. New results on monotonicity, symmetry, stability

if

(a necessary and a sufficient condition), and convergence rate

if

analysis of the codeword-averaged density evolution method are also provided. Our approach based on the linear1 code ensemble will be linked to that of the coset code ensemble [16] by proving the typicality of linear LDPC codes when

where are the crossover probabilities and is the Dirac

delta function. Note: if

, the above collapses to the

z-channel.

the minimum check node degree is sufficiently large, which Example 2: [Composite BiAWGNCs]

was first conjectured in [21]. All of the above generalizations

are based on the convergence to perfect projection, which will

if

serve also as a theoretical foundation for the BP algorithms

even when only symmetric channels are considered. This paper is organized as follows. The formulations of and

if

background on channel models, LDPC code ensembles, the BP algorithm, and density evolution, are provided in Section II. In which corresponds to a bit-level subchannel of the pulse amSection III, an iterative formula is developed for computing the plitude modulation ( PAM) with Gray mapping.

evolution of the codeword-averaged probability density. In Section IV, we state the theorem of convergence to perfect projec- B. Linear LDPC Code Ensembles

tion, which justifies the iterative formula. A detailed proof will The linear LDPC codes of length are actually a special

be given in Appenddix I. Monotonicity, symmetry, and stability family of parity-check codes, such that all codewords can be

theorems are stated and proved in Section V. Section VI con- specified by the following even parity-check equation in

:

sists of simulations and discussion of possible applications of

our new density evolution method. Section VII proves the typi-

cality of linear LDPC codes and revisits BP for symmetric chan-

nels. Section VIII concludes the paper.

where is an

sparse matrix in

with the number

of nonzero elements linearly proportional to . To facilitate our

II. FORMULATIONS A. Symbol-Dependent Asymmetric Channels

analysis, we use a code ensemble rather than a fixed code. Our linear code ensemble is generated by equiprobable edge permutations in a regular bipartite graph.

The memoryless, symbol-dependent channels we consider As illustrated in Fig. 1, the bipartite graph model consists of a

here are modeled as follows. Let and denote a transmitted bottom row of variable nodes (corresponding to codeword bits)

codeword vector and a received signal vector of codeword and a top row of check nodes (corresponding to parity-check

length , where and are the th transmitted symbol and equations). Suppose we have variable nodes on the bottom

1LDPC codes are, by definition, linear codes since only even parity-check equations are considered. Nonetheless, by taking both even and odd paritycheck equations into consideration, the extended LDPC “coset” code has been proven to have important practical and theoretical value in many applications [16]. To be explicit on whether only even parity-check equations are considered or an extended set of parity-check equations is involved, two terms, “linear LDPC codes” and “LDPC coset codes,” will be used whenever a comparison is made, even though the adjective, linear, is redundant for traditional LDPC codes.

and each of them has sockets. There are

check

nodes on the top and each of them has sockets. With these

fixed

nodes, there are a total of

possible con-

figurations obtained by connecting these

sockets

on each side, assuming all sockets are distinguishable.2 The re-

2When assuming all variable/check node sockets are indistinguishable, the

number of configurations can be upper-bounded by

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

sulting graphs (multigraphs) will be regular and bipartite with

degrees denoted by

, and can be mapped to parity-check

codes with the convention that the variable bit is involved in

parity-check equation if and only if the variable node and

the check node are connected by an odd number of edges. We

consider a regular code ensemble

putting equal prob-

ability on each of the possible configurations of the regular bi-

partite graphs described above. One realization of the codebook

ensemble

is shown in Fig. 1. For practical interest, we

assume

.

For each graph in

, the parity-check matrix is an

matrix over

, with

if and only if there

is an odd number of edges between variable node and check

node . Any valid codeword satisfies the parity-check equation

. For future use, we let and denote the indices of the

th variable node and the th check node.

denotes

all check nodes connecting to variable node and similarly

with

.

Besides the regular graph case, we can also consider irregular

code ensembles. Let and denote the finite order edge degree

distribution polynomials

node. The entire BP algorithm with messages representing the corresponding log-likelihood ratio (LLR) is as follows:

(1)

(2)

We note that the BP algorithm is based only on the cycle-free

assumption3 and is actually independent of the channel model.

The initial message depends only on the single-bit LLR

function and can be calculated under asymmetric

. As

a result, the BP algorithm remains the same for memoryless,

symbol-dependent channels.

Example: For BASCs

if if

We assume that the BP is executed in parallel and each iteration

is a “round” in which all variable nodes send messages to all

check nodes and then the check nodes send messages back. We

use to denote the number of iterations that have been executed. where or is the fraction of edges connecting to a degree

variable or check node, respectively. By assigning equal proba- D. Density Evolution

bility to each possible configuration of irregular bipartite graphs

with degree distributions and (similarly to the regular case),

we obtain the equiprobable, irregular, bipartite graph ensemble

. For example:

.

For a symmetric channel and any message-passing algorithm, the probability density of the transmitted messages in each iteration can be calculated iteratively with a concrete theoretical foundation [13]. The iterative formula and related theorems are

C. Message Passing Algorithms and Belief Propagation

termed “density evolution.” Since the BP algorithm performs extremely well under most circumstances and is of great impor-

The message passing decoding algorithm is a distributed tance, sometimes the term “density evolution” is reserved for

algorithm such that each variable/check node has a processor, the corresponding analytical method for BP algorithms.

which takes all incoming messages from its neighbors as

inputs, and outputs new messages back to all its neighbors.

The algorithm can be completely specified by the variable and

check node message maps, and , which may or may not

be stationary (i.e., the maps remain the same as time evolves)

or uniform (i.e., node independent). The message passing

algorithm can be executed sequentially or in parallel depending

on the order of the activations of different node processors.

Henceforth, we consider only parallel message passing algo-

rithms complying with the extrinsic principle (adapted from

turbo codes), i.e., the new message sending to node (or )

does not depend on the received message from the same node

(or ) but depends only on other received messages.

A BP algorithm is a message passing algorithm whose vari-

able and check node message maps are derived from Pearl’s

inference network [5]. Under the cycle-free assumption on the

inference network, BP calculates the exact marginal a poste-

riori probabilities, and thus, we obtain the optimal maximum

a posteriori probability (MAP) decisions. Let denote the

initial message from the variable nodes, and

denote the

III. DENSITY EVOLUTION: NEW ITERATIVE FORMULA
In what follows, we use the BP algorithm as the illustrative example for our new iterative density evolution formula.
With the assumption of channel symmetry and the inherent symmetry of the parity-check equations in LDPC codes, the probability density of the messages in any symmetric message passing algorithm will be codeword independent, i.e., for different codewords, the densities of the messages passed differ only in parities, but all of them are of the same shape [13, Lemma 1].
In the symbol-dependent setting, the symmetry of the channel may not hold. Even though the BP mappings remain the same for asymmetric channels, the densities of the messages for different transmitted codewords are of different shapes and the density for the all-zero codeword cannot represent the behavior when other codewords are transmitted. To circumvent this problem, we average the density of the messages over all valid codewords. However, directly averaging over all codewords takes

messages from its neighbors excluding that from the destination 3An implicit assumption will be revisited in Section VII-B.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4219

Fig. 2. Illustrations of N and X ; l = 2.

denotes any element of

(the subscript

is

omitted if there is no ambiguity). The connection between

, the valid codewords, and

, the tree-satisfying

strings, will be clear in the following remark and in Def-

inition 1.

• For any set of codewords (or strings) , the average op-

erator is defined as

times more computations, which ruins the efficiency of the iterative formula for density evolution. Henceforth, we provide a new iterative formula for the codeword-averaged density evolution which increases the number of computations only by a constant factor; the corresponding theoretical foundations are provided in this section and in Section IV.

• With a slight abuse of notation for

, we define

A. Preliminaries

We consider the density of the message passed from variable

node to check node . The probability density of this mes-

sage is denoted by

where the superscript denotes the

th iteration and the appended argument denotes the actual

transmitted codeword. For example,

is the density of

the initial message from variable node to check node

assuming the all-zero codeword is transmitted.

is the

density from to in the second iteration, and so on. We also

denote by

the density of the message from check node

to variable node in the th iteration.

With the assumption that the corresponding graph is tree-like

until depth

, we define the following quantities. Fig. 2

illustrates these quantities for the code in Fig. 1 with

and

.

•

denotes the tree-like subset of the graph4

with root edge

and depth

, named

as the supporting tree. A formal definition is:

is the

subgraph induced by , where

Namely,

and

denote the density av-

eraged over all compatible codewords with projections

being and , respectively.

Remark: For any tree-satisfying string

, there

may or may not be a codeword with projection

,

since the codeword must satisfy all check nodes, but the string

needs to satisfy only

constraints. Those check nodes

outside

may limit the projected space

to a strict

subset of

. For example, the second row of

in

Fig. 1 implies

. Therefore, two of the four elements of

in Fig. 2 are invalid/impossible projections of

on

. Thus,

is a proper subset of

.

To capture this phenomenon, we introduce the notion of a

perfectly projected

.

Definition 1 (Perfectly Projected

): The supporting

tree

is perfectly projected, if for any

(3)

(4)

where

is the shortest distance between node and

variable node . In other words,

is the depth

tree spanned from edge . Let

denote the That is, if we choose

equiprobably,

will appear

number of variable nodes in

(including variable uniformly among all elements in

. Thus, by looking

node ).

denotes the number of check nodes in only at the projections on

, it is as if we were choosing

•

(check node is excluded by definition). denotes the set of all
valid codewords, and the information source selects each

from

equiprobably and there were only

node constraints and no others.

check

codeword equiprobably from .

The example in Figs. 1 and 2 is obviously not perfectly

• and

are the projections of codeword

projected.

on bit and on the variable nodes in the supporting tree Since the message emitted from node to in the th iteration

, respectively.

depends only on the received signals of the supporting tree,

•

denotes the set of all strings of length

, the codeword-dependent

actually depends

satisfying the

check node constraints in

. only on the projection

, not on the entire codeword .

4The calligraphic V in G = V( ; E) denotes the set of all vertices, including That is,

both variable nodes and check nodes. Namely, a node v 2 V can be a variable/
check node.

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4220
An immediate implication of and (5) is

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005
being a perfect projection

(6)

Because of these two useful properties (5) and (6), throughout

this subsection we assume that

is perfectly projected. The

convergence of

to a perfect projection in probability is

dealt with in Section IV. We will have all the preliminaries nec-

essary for deriving the new density evolution after introducing

the following self-explanatory lemma.

Fig. 3. Illustration of various quantities used in Section III-B.
By (1), (9), and the independence among the input messages, the classical density evolution for BP algorithms [23, eq.(9)] is as follows:
(10)

Lemma 1 (Linearity of Density Transformation): For any

random variable with distribution , if

is

measurable, then

is a random variable with distribu-

tion

. Furthermore, the density trans-

formation is linear, i.e., if

and

,

then

.

B. New Formula
In the th iteration, the probability of sending an incorrect message (averaged over all possible codewords) from variable node to check node is

(11)

where denotes the convolution operator on probability den-

sity functions, which can be implemented efficiently using the

Fourier transform.

is the density transformation func-

tional based on , defined in Lemma 1. Fig. 3 illustrates many

helpful quantities used in (10), (11), and throughout this section.

By (5), (10), and the perfect projection assumption, we have

(12)

Further simplification can be made such that

(7)

Motivated by (7), we concentrate on finding an iterative formula

for the density pair

and

. Throughout this

section, we also assume

is tree-like (cycle free) and

perfectly projected.

Let denote the indicator function. By an auxiliary func-

tion

(13)

(8) where follows from (6), follows from (12), and fol-

and letting the domain of the first coordinate of

be

, lows from the linearity of convolutions. The fact that the sub-

(2) for can be written as

trees generated by edges

are completely disjoint im-

plies that, by the perfect projection assumption on

, the

(9) distributions of strings on different subtrees are independent. As a result, the average of the convolutional products (over these

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4221

strings) equals the convolution of the averaged distributions,

yielding . Finally, follows from the fact that the distribu-

tions of messages from different subtrees are identical according

to the perfect projection assumption.

To simplify

, we need to define

some new notation. We use to represent for simplicity.

Denote by

the collection of all

subtrees rooted at

,

, and by

the strings compatible to

. We can then consider

By (13), (14), and dropping the subscripts during the density evolution, a new density evolution formula for
, is as follows:
With the help of the linearity of distribution transformations and convolutions, the preceding equations can be further simplified and the desired efficient iterative formulas become

containing the strings satisfying parity-check constraint given , and

is the collection of the concatenations of substrings, in which

the leading symbols of the substrings are

. All

these quantities are illustrated in Fig. 3.

Note the following two properties: i) For any , the mes-

sage from variable to check node depends only

on

; and ii) with the leading symbols

fixed and the perfect projection assumption, the projection on

the strings

are independent, and thus, the

averaged convolution of densities is equal to the convolution of

the averaged densities. By repeatedly applying Lemma 1 and

the above two properties, we have

The preceding formula can be easily generalized to the irregular code ensembles
(15) which has the same complexity as the classical density evolution for symmetric channels.
Remark: The above derivation relies heavily on the perfect projection assumption, which guarantees that uniformly averaging over all codewords is equivalent to uniformly averaging over the tree-satisfying strings. Since the tree-satisfying strings are well-structured and symmetric, we are on solid ground to move the average inside the classical density evolution formula.

IV. DENSITY EVOLUTION: FUNDAMENTAL THEOREMS

As stated in Section III, the tree-like until depth and the prefect projection assumptions are critical in our analysis. The use of code ensembles rather than fixed codes facilitates the analysis but its relationship to fixed codes needs to be explored. We restate two necessary theorems from [13], and give a novel perfect projection convergence theorem, which is essential to our new density evolution method. With these theorems, a concrete theoretical foundation will be established.

Theorem 1 (Convergence to the Cycle-Free Case, [13]): Fix

, , and . For any

, there exists a constant

such

that for all

, the code ensemble

satisfies

(14) where

is cycle-free is the support tree as defined by (3).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

Theorem 2 (Convergence to Perfect Projection in Proba-

bility): Fix and . For any regular, bipartite, equiprobable

graph ensemble

, we have

is perfectly projected

Proof: We note tha observing that

is bounded between and . By

is cycle-free and perfectly projected

Remark: The above two theorems focus only on the properties of equiprobable regular bipartite graph ensembles, and are independent of the channel type of interest.

Theorem 3 (Concentration to the Expectation, [13]): With

fixed transmitted codeword , let denote the number of wrong

messages (those ’s such that

). There exists a

constant

such that for any , over the code ensemble

and the channel realizations , we have

is cycle-free and perfectly projected
and using Theorems 1 and 2, we have

(16) Then by Corollary 1, the proof is complete.

Furthermore, is independent of pendent of .

, and thus is inde-

Theorem 3 can easily be generalized to symbol-dependent channels in the following corollary.

Corollary 1: Over the equiprobable codebook , the code

ensemble5

, and channel realizations , (16) still

holds.

Proof: Since the constant in Theorem 3 is indepen-

dent of the transmitted codeword , after averaging over the

equiprobable codebook , the inequality still holds. That is,

The Proof of Theorem 2 will be included in Appendix I.
V. MONOTONICITY, SYMMETRY, AND STABILITY In this section, we prove the monotonicity, symmetry, and stability of our codeword-averaged density evolution method on BP algorithms. Since the codeword-averaged density evolution reduces to the traditional one when the channel of interest is symmetric, the following theorems also reduce to those (in [23] and [13]) for symmetric channels.
A. Monotonicity

Now we have all the prerequisite of proving the theoretical foundation of our codeword-averaged density evolution.

Theorem 4 (Validity of Codeword-Averaged DE): Consider

any regular, bipartite, equiprobable graph ensemble

with fixed , , and .

is derived from (7) and the

codeword-averaged density evolution after iterations. The

probability over equiprobable codebook , the code ensemble

, and the channel realizations , satisfies

Proposition 1 (Monotonicity With Respect to ): Let de-

note the bit-error probability of the codeword-averaged density

evolution defined in (7). Then

, for all .

Proof: We first note that the codeword-averaged ap-

proach can be viewed as concatenating a bit-to-sequence

random mapper with the observation channels, and the larger

the tree structure is, the more observation/information the

decision maker has. Since the BP decoder is the optimal MAP

decoder for the tree structure of interest, the larger the tree

is, the smaller the error probability will be. The proof is thus

complete.

Proposition 2 (Monotonicity With Respect to Degraded Chan-

nels): Let

and

denote two different channel

models, such that

is degraded with respect to (w.r.t.)

. The corresponding decoding error probabilities,

and , are defined in (7). Then for any fixed , we have

.

Proof: By taking the same point of view that the code-

word-averaged approach is a concatenation of a bit-to-sequence

5The only valid codeword for all code instances of the ensemble is the all-zero codeword. Therefore, a fixed bit string is in general not a valid codeword for most instances of the code ensemble, which hampers the averaging over the code ensemble. This, however, can be circumvented by the following construction. We first use Gaussian elimination to index the codewords 1; . . . ; 2 for any code instance in the code ensemble. And we then fix the index instead of the codeword. The statements and the proof of Theorem 3 hold verbatim after this slight modification.

random mapper with the observation channels, this theorem can be easily proved by the channel degradation argument.
B. Symmetry We will now show that even though the evolved density is de-
rived from asymmetric channels, there are still some symmetry

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4223

properties inherent in the symmetric structure of BP algorithms. By letting

and by (17), we have

We define the symmetric distribution pair as follows.

. The averaged

then becomes

Definition 2 (Symmetric Distribution Pairs): Two probability measures and are a symmetric pair if for any integrable function , we have

(18)

A distribution is self-symmetric if pair.

is a symmetric

Proposition 3: Let

be a parity reversing func-

tion, and let

and

denote the resulting density

functions from the codeword-averaged density evolution. Then

and

are a symmetric pair for all .

Remark: In the symmetric channel case,

and

differ only in parity (Lemma 1, [13]). Thus,

is self-symmetric ([23, Theorem 3]).

Proof: We note that by the equiprobable codeword dis-

tribution and the perfect projection assumption

and

act on the random variable , given by

We state three properties which can easily be derived from the

self-symmetry of

. Proofs can be found in [31], [23], and

[30].

•

• The density of

spect to

.

•

. is symmetric with re-
. This justifies the

use of

as our performance measure.

Thus, we consider

, the Chernoff bound of .

With the regularity assumption that

for all in some neighborhood of zero, we state the necessary

and sufficient stability conditions as follows.

Theorem 5 (Sufficient Stability Condition): Let

where is the received signal on the subset and is the distribution over channel realizations and equiprobable codewords. Then by a change of measure

Suppose

, and let be the smallest strictly posi-

tive root of the following equation

This completes the proof. Corollary 2:

If for some ,

, then

if if

where (17)

. In both cases:

and

.

Corollary 3: For any noise distribution tacharyya noise parameter
such that

with Bhat, if there is no

then

will have arbitrarily small bit-error rate (BER) as

is self-symmetric for all , i.e., pair.

tends to infinity. The corresponding can serve as an inner is a symmetric bound of the achievable region for general asymmetric memo-
ryless channels. Further discussion of finite-dimensional bounds

C. Stability

Rather than looking only at the error probability of the

evolved densities

and

, we also focus on its Cher-

noff bound

on the achievable region can be found in [30].

Theorem 6 (Necessary Stability Condition): Let

If

, then

.

• Remark 1:

is the Bhattacharyya noise parameter

and is related to the cutoff rate by

. Further discussion of

for turbo-like

and LDPC codes can be found in [25], [31], [30].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4224

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

• Remark 2: The stability results are first stated in [23]

without the convergence rate statement and the stability

region . Since we focus on general asymmetric channels

(with symmetric channels as a special case), our conver-

gence rate and stability region results also apply to the

symmetric channel case. Benefitting from considering its

Chernoff version, we will provide a simple proof, which

did not appear in [23].

• Remark 3: can be used as a stopping criterion for the

iterations of the density evolution. Moreover, is lower-

bounded by

, which is a computationally

efficient substitute for .

By (15) and the fact that the moment generating function of the convolution equals the product of individual moment generating functions, we have
which is equivalent to (21)
The sufficient stability theorem follows immediately from (21), the iterative upper bound formula.

Proof of Theorem 5: We define the Chernoff bound of the Remark: Inequality (21) is a one-dimensional iterative

density of the messages emitting from check nodes

bound for general asymmetric memoryless channels. In [30],

in a fashion similar to

this iterative upper bound will be further strengthened to

First consider the case in which

. We then have

To simplify the analysis, we assume the all-zero codeword is

transmitted and then generalize the results to nonzero code-

words. Suppose the distributions of and are

and

, respectively. The

becomes

(19)

where the last inequality follows from the fact that

. Since any check node with

can be viewed as the concatenation of many check

nodes with

, by induction and by assuming the all-zero

codeword is transmitted, we have

which is tight for BECs and holds for symmetric channels as well.

Proof of Theorem 6: We prove this result by the erasure

decomposition technique used in [23].

The erasure decomposition lemma in [23] states that, for any

, and any symmetric channel with LLR distribution

, there exists a BEC with LLR distribution

such

that is physically degraded with respect to . Furthermore,

is of the following form:

for all

, where is the Dirac-delta measure centered at

. It can be easily shown that this erasure decomposition lemma

holds even when corresponds to an asymmetric channel with

LLR distributions

, and computed from

(7).

We can then assign

and

to distinguish the distributions for different transmitted sym-

bols .

Suppose

and

. Then, for any

, such that

. For simplicity, we assume

. The physically better BEC is described as above.

If during the iteration procedure (15) we replace the density

with

, then the resulting density will be

(20)

Since

as in (18), the averaging over

all possible codewords does not change (20). By further incor- and the averaged error probability

is

porating the check node degree polynomial , we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(22)

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4225

By the fact that

is the Chernoff bound on

, the regularity condition and the Chernoff the-

orem, for any

, there exists a large enough such that

With a small enough , we have with large enough , we have

. Thus,

With small enough or equivalently large enough , we have

However, by the monotonicity with respect to physically de-

graded channels we have,

, which

contradicts the monotonicity of with respect to . From the

above reasoning, if completes the proof.

, then

, which

Remark: From the sufficient stability condition, for those

codes with

, the convergence rate is exponential in ,

i.e., BER

. However, the number of bits in-

volved in the tree is

, which is

usually much faster than the reciprocal of the decrease rate of

BER

. As a result, we conjecture that the av-

erage performance of the code ensemble with

will have

bad block-error probabilities. This is confirmed later in Fig. 5(b)

and theoretically proved for the BEC in [32]. The converse is

stated and proved in the following corollary.

Corollary 4: Let

denote the block-error probability

of codeword length after iterations of the BP algorithm,

which is averaged over equiprobable codewords, channel real-

izations, and the code ensemble

. If

and sat-

isfying

and

Proof: This result can be proven directly by the cycle-free convergence theorem, the super-exponential bit convergence rate with respect to , and the union bound.

A. Simulation Settings

With the help of the sufficient condition of the stability the-

orem (Theorem 5), we can use to set a stopping criterion for

the iterations of the density evolution. We use the 8-bit quan-

tized density evolution method with

being the domain

of the LLR messages. We will determine the largest thresholds

such that the evolved Chernoff bound

hits within

100 iterations, i.e.,

. Better performance can

be achieved by using more iterations, which, however, is of less

practical interest. For example, the 500-iteration threshold of

our best code for z-channels, 12 B (described below), is

,

compared to the 100-iteration threshold

. Five different

code ensembles with rate are extensively simulated, in-

cluding regular

codes, regular

codes, 12A codes,

12B codes, and 12C codes as follows:

• 12A: 12A is a rate- code ensemble found by

Richardson, et al. in [23], which is the best known degree

distribution optimized for the symmetric BiAWGNC,

having maximum degree constraints

and

. Its degree distributions are

• 12B: 12B is a rate- code ensemble obtained by min-

imizing the hitting time of in z-channels, through

hill-climbing and linear programming techniques. The

maximum degree constraints are also

and

. The differences between 12A and 12B are

1) 12B is optimized for the z-channels with our code-

word-averaged density evolution, and 12A is optimized

for the symmetric BiAWGNC. 2) 12B is optimized with

respect to the hitting time of (depending on

)

rather than a fixed small threshold. The degree distribu-

tions of 12B are

A similar observation is also made and proved in [25], in

which it is shown that the interleaving gain exponent of the

block-error rate is

, where is the number of parallel

constituent codes. The variable node degree is the number of

parity-check equations (parity-check subcodes) in which a vari-

able bit participates. In a sense, an LDPC code is similar to

parity-check codes interleaved together. With

, good in-

terleaving gain for the block-error probability is not expected.

VI. SIMULATIONS AND DISCUSSION

• 12C: 12C a rate- code ensemble similar to 12B, but with being hardwired to , which is suggested by the convergence rate in the sufficient stability condition. The degree distributions of 12C are

It is worth noting that for asymmetric channels, different codewords will have different error-resisting capabilities. In this section, we consider the averaged performance. We can obtain codeword-independent performance by adding a random number to the information message before encoding and then subtracting it after decoding. This approach, however, introduces higher computational cost.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005
TABLE I THRESHOLDS OF DIFFERENT CODES AND CHANNELS, WITH PRECISION 10

Fig. 4. Asymptotic thresholds and the achievable regions of different codes in binary asymmetric channels.

Four different channels are considered, including the BEC,

BSC, z-channel, and BiAWGNC. Z-channels are simulated by

binary asymmetric channels with very small

and different values of . Table I summarizes the thresh-

olds with precision . Thresholds are not only presented

by their conventional channel parameters, but also by their

Bhattacharyya noise parameters (Chernoff bounds). The

column “stability” lists the maximum

such that

, which is an upper bound on the

values

of decodable channels. Further discussion of the relationship

between

and the decodable threshold can be found

in [30].

From Table I, we observe that 12A outperforms 12B in

Gaussian channels (for which 12A is optimized), but 12B is

superior in z-channels for which it is optimized. The above

behavior promises room for improvement with codes optimized

for different channels, as was also shown in [14].

Fig. 4 demonstrates the asymptotic thresholds of these codes

in BASCs with the curves of 12A and 12B being very close

together. It is seen that 12B is slightly better when

or

. We notice that all the achievable regions of

these codes are bounded by the symmetric mutual information

rate (with a

a priori distribution), which was also

suggested in [16]. The difference between the symmetric mu-

tual information rate and the capacity for asymmetric channels

is generally indistinguishable from the practical point of view.

For example, in [33], it was shown that the ratio between the

symmetric mutual information rate and the capacity is lower

bounded by

. [34] further proved that the absolute

difference is upper-bounded by 0.011 bit/symbol. Further dis-

cussion of capacity achieving codes with nonuniform a priori

distributions can be found in [35] and [29].

Fig. 5(a) and (b) considers several fixed finite codes in z-chan-

nels. We arbitrarily select graphs from the code ensemble with

codeword lengths

and

. Then, with these

graphs (codes) fixed, we find the corresponding parity matrix

, use Gaussian elimination to find the generator matrix , and

transmit different codewords by encoding equiprobably selected

information messages. Belief propagation decoding is used with

40 iterations for each codeword. 10 000 codewords are trans-

mitted, and the overall bit/block-error rates versus different

are plotted for different code ensembles and codeword lengths.

Our new density evolution predicts the waterfall region quite ac-

curately when the BERs are of primary interest. Though there

are still gaps between the performance of finite codes and our

asymptotic thresholds, the performance gaps between different

finite-length codes are very well predicted by the differences be-

tween their asymptotic thresholds. From the above observations

and the underpinning theorems, we see that our new density evo-

lution is a successful generalization of the traditional one from

both practical and theoretical points of view.

Fig. 5(b) exhibits the block error rate of the same 10 000-

codeword simulation. The conjecture of bad block-error proba-

bilities for

codes is confirmed. Besides the conjectured

bad block-error probabilities, Fig. 5(a) and (b) also suggests that

codes with

will have a better error floor compared to

those with

, which can be partly explained by the com-

paratively slow convergence speed stated in the sufficient sta-

bility condition for

codes. 12C is so far the best code we

have for

. However, its threshold is not as good as those

of 12A and 12B. If good block-error rates and low error floor

are our major concerns, 12C (or other codes with

) can

still be competitive choices. Recent results in [36] shows that the

error floor for codes with

can be lowered by carefully ar-

ranging the degree– variable nodes in the corresponding graph

while keeping a similar waterfall threshold.

Fig. 6(a) and (b) illustrates the BERs versus different BASC

settings with 2000 transmitted codewords. Our computed

density evolution threshold is again highly correlated with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4227

Fig. 5. Bit/block-error rates versus  with fixed  = 0:00001. Computed thresholds for symmetric mutual information rate, (3; 6), 12A, 12B, and 12C codes are 0:2932; 0:2305; 0:2710; 0:2730; and 0:2356, respectively. Forty iterations of BP algorithms were performed. 10 000 codewords were used for the simulations. (a) Bit-error rates, (b) Block-error rates.

Fig. 6. Bit-error rates versus  for  = 0:01 and  = 0:7. The DE thresholds of (12A, 12B, 12C, (3; 6)) are (0:2346; 0:2332; 0:2039; 0:1981) for  = 0:01 and (0:1202; 0:1206; 0:1036; 0:0982) for  = 0:07. Forty iterations of BP algorithms were performed. 2000 codewords were used for the simulations. (a) 12A and 12B. (b) 12C and regular (3; 6) codes.

performance of finite-length codes for different asymmetric

It is well known that one can construct capacity-

channel settings.

approaching codes by incorporating symmetric-

We close this section by highlighting two applications of our

information-rate-approaching linear codes with the

results.

symbol mapper and demapper as an inner code [29],

1) Error Floor Analysis: “The error floor” is a characteristic of iterative decoding algorithms, which is of practical importance and may not be able to be determined solely by simulations. More analytical tools are needed to find

[35], [37]. Understanding density evolution for general memoryless channels allows us to construct such symmetric-information-rate-approaching codes (for asymmetric memoryless channels), and thus to find

error floors for corresponding codes. Our convergence

capacity-approaching codes after concatenating the inner

rate statements in the sufficient stability condition may

symbol mapper and demapper. It is worth noting that in-

shed some light on finding codes with low error floors.

tersymbol interference channels are dealt with by Kavcˇic´

2) Capacity-Approaching Codes for General Nonstan-

et al. in [16] using the coset code approach. It will be of

dard Channels: Various very good codes (capacity

great help if a unified framework for asymmetric channels

approaching) are known for standard channels, but very

with memory can be found by incorporating both coset

good codes for nonstandard channels are not yet known.

codes and codeword averaging approaches.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4228

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

Fig. 7. Comparison of the approaches based on codeword averaging and the coset code ensemble. (a) Linear code ensemble versus asymmetric channels. (b) Linear code ensemble versus symmetrized channels. (c) Coset code ensemble versus asymmetric channels.

VII. FURTHER IMPLICATIONS OF GENERALIZED

devoted to the question whether the systems in Fig. 7(a) and (c)

DENSITY EVOLUTION

are equivalent in terms of performance. In sum, the performance

A. Typicality of Linear LDPC Codes

of the linear code ensemble is very unlikely to be identical to that

of the coset code ensemble. However, when the minimum

One reason that asymmetric channels are often overlooked

is we can always transform an asymmetric channel into a

symmetric channel. Depending on different points of view, this channel-symmetrizing technique is termed the coset code is sufficiently large, we can prove that their performance argument [16] or dithering/the independent and identically dis- discrepancy is theoretically indistinguishable. In practice, the

tributed (i.i.d.) channel adapter [21], as illustrated in Fig. 7(c) discrepancy for

is 0.05%.

and (b). Our generalized density evolution provides a simple Let

and

de-

way to directly analyze the linear LDPC code ensemble on note the two evolved densities with aligned parity, and similarly

asymmetric channels, as in Fig. 7(a).

define

and

. Our

As shown in Theorems 5 and 6, the necessary and sufficient main result in (15) can be rewritten in the following form:

stability conditions of linear LDPC codes for asymmetric chan-

nels, Fig. 7(a), are identical to those of the coset code ensemble,

Fig. 7(c). Monte Carlo simulations based on finite-length codes

[21] further show that the codeword-averaged per-

formance in Fig. 7(a) is nearly identical6 to the performance of

Fig. 7(c) when the same encoder/decoder pair is used. The above

two facts suggest a close relationship between linear codes and

the coset code ensemble, and it was conjectured in [21] that the

scheme in Fig. 7(a) should always have the same/similar perfor-

(23)

mance as those illustrated by Fig. 7(c). This short subsection is Let

denote the corresponding bit-error probability of

6That is, it is within the precision of the Monte Carlo simulation.

the linear codes after iterations. For comparison, the traditional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4229

Fig. 8. Density evolution for z-channels with the linear code ensemble and the coset code ensemble.

formula of density evolution for the symmetrized channel (the coset code ensemble) is as follows:

TABLE II

THRESHOLD COMPARISON p

OF LINEAR AND COSET LDPC

CODES ON Z-CHANNELS

(24)

where

Similarly, let

denote the corresponding bit error

probability.

It is clear from (24) that when the channel of interest is

symmetric, namely,

, then

for all

linear codes is able to converge within 179 iterations, while the coset code ensemble shows no convergence within 500 iterations. This demonstrates the possible performance discrepancy, though we do not have analytical results proving that the latter will not converge after further iterations. Table II compares the decodable thresholds such that the density evolution enters the stability region within 100 iterations. We notice that the larger
is, the smaller the discrepancy is. This phenomenon can be characterized by the following theorem.

However, for asymmetric channels, since the variable-node it-

eration involves convolution of several densities given the same

value, the difference between

and

will

be amplified after each variable node iteration. Hence, it is very

unlikely that the decodable thresholds of linear codes and coset

codes will be analytically identical, namely

Theorem 7: Consider asymmetric memoryless channels and

a fixed pair of finite-degree polynomials and . The shifted

version of the check node polynomial is denoted as

where

. Let

denote the evolved density from the

coset code ensemble with degrees

, and

denote the averaged density from the linear code ensemble with

Fig. 8 demonstrates the traces of the evolved densities for the degrees

. For any

,

in

regular

code on z-channels. With the one-way crossover distribution for all

, with the convergence rate for each

probability being

, the generalized density evolution for iteration being

for some

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

Corollary 5 (The Typicality Results for Z-Channels): For any

, there exists a

such that

We first note that for all

is the averaged distribu-

tion of

when the inputs are governed by

satisfying

. From this observation, we can derive

the following iterative equations:

Namely, the asymptotic decodable thresholds of the linear and

the coset code ensemble are arbitrarily close when the minimum

check node degree

is sufficiently large.

Similar corollaries can be constructed for other channel

models with different types of noise parameters, e.g., the in

the composite BiAWGNC. A proof of Corollary 5 is found in

Appendix III.

By induction, the difference thus becomes

Proof of Theorem 7: Since the functionals in (23) and (24) are continuous with respect to convergence in distribution, we need only to show that

(26)

(25)

where denotes convergence in distribution. Then, by in-

ductively applying this weak convergence argument, for any

bounded ,

in distribution for all

. Without loss of generality,7 we may assume

and prove the weak convergence of distributions on the domain

By Taylor’s expansion and the BASC decomposition argument

in [30], we can show that for all

,

, and for all

possible and , the quantity in (26) converges to zero with

convergence rate

for some

. A detailed

derivation of the convergence rate is given in Appendix IV. Since

the limit of the right-hand side of (26) is zero, the proof of weak

convergence is complete. The exponentially fast convergence

rate

also justifies the fact that even for moderate

, the performances of linear and coset LDPC codes

are very close.

on which the check node iteration becomes

Let denote the density of

given that the distribution

of is

and let similarly correspond to

.

Similarly, let

and

denote the output distributions on

when the check node degree is

. It is worth noting

that any pair of and can be mapped bijectively to the

LLR distributions

and

.

Let

, de-

note the Fourier transform of the density . Proving (25) is

equivalent to showing that

Remark 1: Consider any nonperfect message distribution,

namely, such that

. A persistent reader

may notice that

, namely, as

becomes large, all information is erased after passing a check

node of large degree. If this convergence (erasure effect) occurs

earlier than the convergence of

and

, the

performances of linear and coset LDPC codes are “close” only

when the code is “useless.”8 To quantify the convergence rate,

we consider again the distributions on and their Fourier trans-

forms. For the average of the output distributions

, we

have

However, to deal with the strictly growing average of the “limit

distribution,” we concentrate on the distribution of the normal-

ized output

instead. We then need to prove that

(27)

8 7We also need to assume that x; P

(x)(m = 0) = 0 so that

j j 2 ln coth

almost surely. This assumption can be relaxed by separately

2 f 0 g considering the event that m = 0 for some i 1; . . . ; d 1 .

8To be more precise, it corresponds to an extremely high-rate code and the information is erased after every check node iteration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4231

By Taylor’s expansion and the BASC decomposition argument,

one can show that the limit of (27) exists and the conver-

gence rate is

. (A detailed derivation is included in

Appendix IV.) This convergence rate is much slower than

the exponential rate

in the Proof of Theorem 7.

Therefore, we do not need to worry about the case in which the

required for the convergence of

and

is

excessively large so that

.

Remark 2: The intuition behind Theorem 7 is that when the

minimum is sufficiently large, the parity-check constraint

becomes relatively less stringent. Thus we can approximate the

density of the outgoing messages for linear codes by assuming

all bits involved in that particular parity-check equation are

“independently” distributed among

, which leads to

the formula for the coset code ensemble. On the other hand,

extremely large is required for a check node iteration to

completely destroy all information coming from the previous

iteration. This explains the difference between their conver-

gence rates:

versus

.

Fig. 9 illustrates the weak convergence predicted by The-

orem 7 and depicts the convergence rates of

and

Our typicality result can be viewed as a complementing the-

orem of the concentration theorem in [16, Corollary 2.2], where

a constructive method of finding a typical coset-defining syn-

drome is not specified. Besides the theoretical importance, we

are now on a solid basis to interchangeably use the linear LDPC

codes and the LDPC coset codes when the check node degree is

of moderate size. For instance, from the implementation point of view, the hardware uniformity of linear codes makes them a superior choice compared to any other coset code. We can then use the fast density evolution [38] plus the coset code ensemble

Fig. 9. Illustration of the weak convergence of Q (0) and Q (1). One can see that the convergence of Q (0) and Q (1) is faster than the convergence of (Q (0) + Q (1))=(2) and  .

to optimize the degree distribution for the linear LDPC codes. Or instead of simulating the codeword-averaged performance of linear LDPC codes, we can simulate the error probability of the all-zero codeword in the coset code ensemble, in which the efficient LDPC encoder [8] is not necessary.

Namely, with only local knowledge about possible codewords, whether BP has the same performance as the optimal detector with the global information about the entire codebook and unlimited computational power when we are only interested in the first iterations? The answer is a straightforward corollary to

B. Revisiting the Belief Propagation Decoder
Two known facts about the BP algorithm and the density evolution method are as follows. First, the BP algorithm is optimal for any cycle-free network, since it exploits the independence of the incoming LLR message. Second, by the cycle-free convergence theorem, the traditional density evolution is able to predict the behavior of the BP algorithm (designed for the tree structure) for iterations, even when we are focusing on a Tanner graph of a finite-length LDPC code, which inevitably has many cycles. The performance of BP, predicted by density evolution, is outstanding so that we “implicitly assume” that the BP (designed for the tree structure) is optimal for the first iterations in terms of minimizing the codeword-averaged BER. Theoretically, to be able to minimize the codeword-av-

Theorem 2, the convergence to perfect projection, which provides the missing link regarding the optimality of BP when only local observations (on the are available.

Theorem 8 (Local Optimality of the BP Decoder): Fix

. For sufficiently large codeword length , almost all instances

in the random code ensemble have the property that the BP de-

coder for after iterations,

, coincides with the

optimal MAP bit detector

, where is a fixed in-

teger. The MAP bit detector

uses the same number

of observations as in

but is able to exploit the global

knowledge about the entire codebook.

Proof: When the support tree

is perfectly pro-

jected, the local information about the tree-satisfying strings is

equivalent to the global information about the entire codebook.

eraged BER, the optimal decision rule inevitably must exploit Therefore, the extra information about the entire codebook does

the global knowledge about all possible codewords, which is, not benefit the decision maker, and

.

however, not available to the BP decoder. A question of in- Theorem 2 shows that

converges to perfect projection

terest is whether BP is indeed optimal for the first iterations? in probability, which in turn implies that for sufficiently large

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4232

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

, BP decoder is locally optimal for almost all instances of the code ensemble.
Note: Even when limiting ourselves to symmetric memoryless channels, this local optimality of BP can only be proved9 by the convergence to perfect projection. Theorem 8 can thus be viewed as a completion of the classical density evolution for symmetric memoryless channels.

practical and theoretical points of view, our codeword-averaged density evolution offers a straightforward and successful generalization of the traditional symmetric density evolution for general asymmetric memoryless channels.
APPENDIX I PROOF OF THEOREM 2
We first introduce the following corollary.

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have developed a codeword-averaged density

evolution, which allows analysis of general asymmetric memo-

ryless channels. An essential perfect projection convergence the-

orem has been proved by a constraint propagation argument and

by analyzing the behavior of random matrices. With this per-

fect projection convergence theorem, the theoretical foundation

of the codeword-averaged density evolution is well established.

Most of the properties of symmetric density evolution have been

generalized and proved for the codeword-averaged density evo-

lution on asymmetric channels, including monotonicity, distri-

bution symmetry, and stability. Besides a necessary stability

condition, a sufficient stability condition has been stated with

convergence rate arguments and a simple proof.

The typicality of the linear LDPC code ensemble has been

proved by the weak convergence (w.r.t. ) of the evolved densi-

ties in our codeword-averaged density evolution. Namely, when

the check node degree is sufficiently large (e.g.,

), the

performance of the linear LDPC code ensemble is very close

to (e.g., within 0.05%) the performance of the LDPC coset code

ensemble. One important corollary to the perfect projection con-

vergence theorem is the optimality of the BP algorithms when

the global information about the entire codebook is accessible.

This can be viewed as a completion of the theory of classical

density evolution for symmetric memoryless channels.

Extensive simulations have been presented, the degree distri-

bution has been optimized for z-channels, and possible appli-

cations of our results have been discussed as well. From both

9The existing cycle-free convergence theorem along does not guarantee the local optimality of BP.

Corollary 6 (Cycle-Free Convergence): For a sequence , we have for any
-

Proof of Theorem 2: In this proof, the subscript

will

be omitted for notational simplicity.

We notice that if for any

is perfectly projected,

then so is . Choose

. By Corollary

6, we have

is perfectly projected is perfectly projected is perfectly projected

is cycle-free

is cycle-free

is perfectly projected

is cycle-free

We then need only to show that

is perfectly projected

is cycle-free (28)

To prove (28), we take a deeper look at the incidence matrix (the parity-check matrix) , and use the regular code as our illustrative example. The proof is nonetheless general for all regular code ensembles. Conditioning on the event that the graph is cycle-free until depth , we can transform into the form of (29) (see the bottom of the page) by row and column swaps.

11111 j

j

0 0 0 0 0 0j0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0j0 0

1

j 1111

j

1

j

1111

j

1

j

1111

j

1

j

1111

j

A=

1 1

j j

1111 1111

j j

1j

1 111

j

1j

1111

j

1j

1111

j

1j

1111 j

0 0 0 0 0 0j0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0j0 0

j1

j 111

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(29)

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4233

Using to denote the Kronecker product (whether it represents convolution or Kronecker product should be clear from the context), (29) can be further expressed as shown by the first expression at the top of the page, where denotes the identity

matrix,

is the incidence matrix of the

equiprobable, bipartite subgraph, in which all

variable

nodes have degree , 80 check nodes have degree

, and

check nodes have degree . Conditioning on a more

general event that the graph is cycle-free until depth

rather than , we will have the second expression at the top

of the page, where corresponds to the incidence matrix of

the cycle-free graph of depth . is the incidence matrix

with rows (check nodes) in and having degree

and . For convenience, we denote the blocks in as

no such exists and

is perfectly projected.10 Instead of

proving is of full rank, we take a different approach, which

takes care of the constraint propagation.

From (30), we know that, for

to exist, there must exist

a nonzero row vector

such that

(32) and

(33)
From (33), the ’s in must be aligned such that four neighboring bits should have the same value; for example,

Then is not perfectly projected if and only if there exists

a nonzero row vector

such that

Any nonzero satisfying (32) is generated by

. By ap-

plying the row symmetry in , we see that the ’s in any are

uniformly distributed among all these

bits. Therefore,

conditioning on the event that there exists a not-all-one satis-

fying (32), the probability that satisfies (33) is

satisfies (33) satisfies (32) and is not the 's in are aligned satisfies (32) and is not

there are ones in

(30)

and

is not in the row space of

(34)

or equivalently

is not in

(31) The last inequality follows from the assumption that is neither

Equations (31) and (30) say that there exists a constraint on the variable nodes of , which is not from the linear combination of those check node equations within , but rather is imposed by the parity-check equations outside . It can be easily proved that if the matrix is of full row rank, then

all-zero nor all-one. The reason why we can exclude the case that is all-one is that, if is odd, then there is an even number

10Unfortunately,

is not of full row rank. We can only show that with

sufficiently large n, the row rank of

converges to the number of rows

minus one by methods similar to those in [39]. A simple constraint propagation

argument is still necessary for this approach.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

of ’s in each column of . Since there is only one in each

column of

, by (30), an all-one can only generate an

all-zero , which puts no constraints on

. If is even,

by the same reasoning, an all-one will generate of the form

Nevertheless, when is even, this specific type of is in the

row space of , which does not fulfill the requirement in (31).

From the above reasoning, we can exclude the all-one .

Let denote the number of rows of minus

.

The number of vectors satisfying (32) is upper-bounded by

. By (34), Proposition 4 (which will be formally stated and

proved later), and the union bound, we have

is not perfectly projected

is cycle-free

for codes with redundant check node equations (not of full row rank), it is probabilistically hard for the external constraints to propagate inside and impose on the variable nodes within . This property is helpful when we consider BP decoding on the alternative graph representation as in [40].
We close this appendix by stating the proposition regarding , the number of linearly dependent rows in . The proof is left to Appendix II.

Proposition 4: Consider the semiregular code ensemble

generated by equiprobable edge permutation

on a bipartite graph with variable nodes of degree , and

and check nodes with respective degrees

and

. The corresponding parity-check matrix is

. With

denoting the number of linearly dependent rows in , i.e.,

, we have

satisfying (30) and (31) which satisfies (32) and (33) but is not all-one
satisfies (33) satisfies (32) and is not # of is smaller than # of is larger than
(35)

which automatically implies

for any

.

Corollary 7: Let denote the rate of a regular LDPC code

ensemble

, i.e.,

, where

is the corresponding parity-check matrix. Then converges to

in , i.e.,

To prove the case

, we focus on the probability that the

constraints propagate two levels rather than just one level, i.e.,

instead of (28), we focus on proving the following statement:

Proof: It is obvious that

. To show that

is perfectly projected

is cycle-free

Most of the analysis remains the same. The conditional probability in (34) will be replaced by
is able to propagate two levels satisfying (32) propagates the second level propagates the first level satisfying (32) propagates the first level satisfying (32)

we let

and rewrite

By Proposition 4 and the fact that

, we have

. This completes the proof.

A stronger version of the convergence of with respect to the block length can be found in [39].

APPENDIX II PROOF OF PROPOSITION 4

We finish the proof of Proposition 4 by first stating the foland 's to propagate the second and first levels lowing lemma.

Lemma 2: For all

, we have

where the inequality marked follows from an analysis of

the minimum number of bits required for the constraint propa-

gation similar to that for the single-level case. By this stronger

inequality and a bounding inequality similar to that in (35), we

thus complete the proof of the case

for all regular codes

of practical interest.

Proof: By Stirling’s double inequality we can prove

Note: This constraint propagation argument shows that the convergence to a perfectly projected tree is very strong. Even which immediately leads to the desired inequality.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR ASYMMETRIC MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

4235

Proof of Proposition 4: By the definition of

total # of codewords

, where

Then

, we have .

# of codewords of weight

Using the enumerating function as in [41], [39] and define as

the above quantity can be further upper bounded as follows.

The other direction that

can be

easily obtained by symmetry.

By definition, for any

, we can find a sufficiently large

such that for a z-channel with one-way crossover prob-

ability

is in the interior of

the stability region. We note that the stability region depends

only on the Bhattacharyya noise parameter of

, which is

a continuous function with respect to convergence in distribu-

tion. Therefore, by Theorem 7, there exists a

such that

is also in the stability region. By the definition of the

stability region, we have

, which implies

. The proof is thus complete.

APPENDIX IV THE CONVERGENCE RATES OF (26) AND (27)

For (26), we will consider the cases that

and

sepa-

rately. By the BASC decomposition argument, namely, all asym-

metric channels can be decomposed as the probabilistic com-

bination of many BASCs, we can limit our attention to simple

BASCs rather than general memoryless asymmetric channels.

Suppose

and

correspond to a BASC with

crossover probabilities and . Without loss of generality, we

may assume

because of the previous assumption

that

. We then have

(36)
where the second inequality follows from Lemma 2 and the third inequality follows from the fact that the binary entropy function and
is upper-bounded by . By defining

the summation in (36) is upper-bounded11 by

By Taylor’s expansion, for

, (26) becomes

By simple calculus,

is attained when

. Since

, the summation in (36) is bounded

by for all , and therefore,

The proof is complete.
APPENDIX III PROOF OF COROLLARY 5 We prove one direction that

which converges to zero with convergence rate

.

For

, we have

which converges to zero with convergence rate

,

11The range of i is expanded here from a discrete integer set to a continuous where

satisfies

. Since the conver-

interval.

gence rate is determined by the slower of the above two, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

have proven that (26) converges to zero with rate

for some

.

Consider (27). Since we assume that the input is not perfect,

we have

. For

, by Taylor’s expansion,

we have

which converges to

with rate

. For

, we have

which converges to zero with rate

. Since the

overall convergence rate is the slower of the above two, we have

proven that the convergence rate is

.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and

decoding: Turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 10, pp.

1261–1271, Oct. 1996.

[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, ser. Research Mono-

graph Series. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar.

1999.

[4] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.

[5] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Network of

Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[6] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. Mackay, and J. F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an

instance of Pearl’s “Belief Propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[7] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On

the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the

Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[8] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-den-

sity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp.

638–656, Feb. 2001.

[9] D. A. Spielman, “Linear-time encodable and decodable error-correcting

codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.

[10] J. W. Byers, M. Luby, and M. Mitzenmacher, “A digital fountain

approach to asynchronous reliable multicast,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas

Commun., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1528–1540, Oct. 2002.

[11] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman,

“Analysis of low-density codes and improved designs using irregular

graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, Dallas,

TX, May 1998, pp. 249–258.

[12]

, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.

47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.

[13] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-

check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb.

2001.

[14] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code

optimization of low density parity-check codes on Rayleigh fading chan-

nels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 924–934, May 2001.

[15] J. Garcia-Frias, “Decoding of low-density parity check codes over finite-

state binary Markov channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information

Theory, Washington, DC, Jun./Jul. 2001, p. 72.

[16] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution and code performance bound,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1636–1652, Jul. 2003.
[17] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[18] J. Li, K. R. Narayanan, E. Kurtas, and C. N. Georghiades, “On the performance of high-rate TPC/SPC codes and LDPC codes over partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 723–734, May 2002.
[19] A. Thangaraj and S. W. McLaughlin, “Thresholds and scheduling for LDPC-coded partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2307–2309, Sep. 2002.
[20] G. Caire, D. Burshtein, and S. Shamai, “LDPC coding for interference mitigation at the transmitter,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerion Conf. Comunication., Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[21] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, L. B. Milstein, and H. D. Pfister, “Capacity-approaching bandwidth-efficient coded modulation schemes based on lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 2141–2155, Sep. 2003.
[22] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. I˙. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[23] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[24] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: Asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[25] H. Jin and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for turbo code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1451–1461, Jun. 2002.
[26] F. Lehmann, “Distance properties of irregular LDPC codes,” Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, p. 85, Jun./Jul. 2003.
[27] S. Shamai (Shitz) and I. Sason, “Variations on the Gallager bounds, connections, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3029–3051, Dec. 2002.
[28] A. Bennatan and D. Burshtein, “Iterative decoding of LDPC codes over arbitrary discrete-memoryless channels,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1416–1425.
[29] A. Bennatan and D. Burshtein, “On the application of LDPC codes to arbitrary discrete-memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 417–438, Mar. 2004.
[30] C. C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “On finite-dimensional bounds for LDPC-like codes with iterative decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory and Its Applications, Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004.
[31] A. Khandekar, “Graph-based codes and iterative decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, Calif. Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, 2002.
[32] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 123.
[33] E. E. Majani and H. Rumsey Jr., “Two results on binary-input discrete memoryless channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int.. Symp. Information Theory, Budapest, Hungary, Jun. 1991, p. 104.
[34] N. Shulman and M. Feder, “The uniform distribution as a universal prior,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1356–1362, Jun. 2004.
[35] R. J. McEliece, “Are turbo-like codes effective on nonstandard channels?,” IEEE Information Theory Soc. Newslett., vol. 51, no. 4, Dec. 2001.
[36] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Lowering the error-rate floors of moderatelength high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 237.
[37] E. Ratzer and D. MacKay, “Sparse low-density parity-check codes for channels with cross-talk,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Paris, France, Mar./Apr., 2003, pp. 127–130.
[38] H. Jin and T. J. Richardson, “Fast density evolution,” in Proc. 38th Conf. Informatio Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2004.
[39] G. Miller and G. Cohen, “The rate of regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2989–2992, Nov. 2003.
[40] V. Kumar, O. Milenkovic, and K. Prakash, “On graphical representations of algebraic codes suitable for iterative decoding,” in Proc. 39th Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, Baltimore, MD, Mar. 2005.
[41] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115–1131, Jun. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:59:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

