This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2005 proceedings.

VLSI Implementation of a Low-Error-Floor and Capacity-Approaching Low-Density Parity-Check Code Decoder with Multi-Rate Capacity*
Lei Yang, Hui Liu and C.-J. Richard Shi
Dept. of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 {yanglei, hliu, cjshi} @ee.washington.edu

Abstract—With the superior error correction capability, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes have initiated wide scale interests in wireless communication and storage fields. In the past, various structures of single code-rate LDPC decoders have been reported. However, to cover a wide range of service requirements and diverse interference conditions in wireless applications, LDPC decoders that can operate at both high and low code rates are desirable. In this paper, a 9k code length multi-rate LDPC decoder architecture is presented and implemented on a Xilinx FPGA device. Using pin selection, three operating modes, namely, the irregular 1/2 code, the regular 5/8 code and the regular 7/8 code, are supported. Furthermore, to suppress the error floor level, a characterization on the conditions for short cycles in a LDPC code matrix expanded from a small base matrix is presented, and a cycle elimination algorithm is developed to detect and break such short cycles. The effectiveness of the cycle elimination algorithm has been verified by both simulation and hardware measurements, which show that the error floor is suppressed to a much lower level without incurring any performance penalty. The implemented decoder is tested in an experimental LDPC-OFDM system and achieves the superior measured performance of block error rate below 10-7 at SNR 1.8 dB.
Keywords – (Low-Density Parity-Check) LDPC; (Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing) OFDM; Cycle Elimination; Block Error Rate; (Signal to Noise Ratio) SNR; (Forward Error Correction) FEC; FPGA; VLSI
I. INTRODUCTION*
Recently, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have attracted an ever increasing amount of attention due to their superior error correction capacity. A LDPC code is a linear block code described with a binary sparse M × N parity-check matrix H. Each row of matrix H corresponds to a parity check and each column represents a demodulated symbol. The number of non-zero elements in a row (column) is defined as the row (column) weight dC (dV). If all rows and all columns are of uniform weight, the LDPC code is called a regular code, otherwise it is an irregular code. Generally, the notion of Tanner graph has been introduced to represent LDPC codes. A Tanner graph is a bipartite graph with variable nodes on one side and check nodes on the other side. Each variable node corresponds to a received symbol, each check node corresponds to a particular set of parity check constraints, and each edge corresponds to a non-zero entry in the parity check matrix. A cycle of length 2g is defined as a closed path that travels a set of g variable nodes and g check nodes through edges but without traversing the same edge twice.
* This research was sponsored by a grant from DARPA.

Typically, iterative belief propagation (BP) algorithms are exploited to decode the LDPC codes. In the decoding process, messages are exchanged along the graph edges, and computed at the variable/check nodes. If a LDPC code is well designed, the messages will converge exponentially to the correct bits after a finite number of iterations. However, proper operations of the iterative BP algorithms hinge on the assumption that neighbors of a node in the Tanner graph are conditionally independent. If there are too many short cycles in the graph, the above assumption is violated, and the BP algorithms will converge slowly and even result in wrong decoded results. Hence, how to increase the Tanner graph girth, which is defined the length of the shortest cycles, is critically important in the construction of LDPC codes. Several algorithms, such as bit-filling [1] and progressive edge-growth (PEG) [2], have been proposed to improve the girth of a Tanner graph. But those algorithms are developed with no consideration of the decoder VLSI implementation. Consequently, the resulting LDPC matrix with randomly located non-zeros elements is hard to be mapped to a hardware structure.
To design LDPC codes that are amenable to VLSI implementation, several methods [3][4][5][6] have been developed to jointly consider the code design and the hardware implementation. The basic idea of these methods is that before constructing an M×N parity-check matrix, a small Mb×Nb base matrix is built, in which each non-zero element at the position (i, j) is to be expanded to a square permutation L×L matrix (M=Mb·L, N=Nb·L). The square permutation matrix is an identity matrix whose rows have been cyclically shifted by a set of amount Pi,j, where Pi,j is a function of i and j. The resulting M×N matrix is referred to as the expanded matrix. This LDPC matrix structure can be conveniently converted to a partially parallel decoder architecture consisting of a structured array of memory and computation units [3].
The above VLSI-oriented LDPC codes can achieve the gain performance as good as the random codes, but they cannot guarantee the girth of the expanded LDPC matrix to be improved to a user specified value. In our research, we observed that short cycles in the base matrix can result in a collection of the same length cycles in the expanded matrix. Furthermore, we characterize the necessary and sufficient conditions for such scenarios to occur. With this characterization, we develop a cycle elimination algorithm (CE algorithm). In this algorithm, short cycles existing in the base matrix are checked first. Then through setting the cyclically shifted values Pi,j, those short cycles will not incur the same length cycles in the expanded matrix, thus yielding high girth performance. From our experience, for moderate length LDPC codes expanded from a base matrix, the CE algorithm can

IEEE Globecom 2005

1261

0-7803-9415-1/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:58:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2005 proceedings.

generate LDPC codes with girth at least 10. This can eliminate the error floor in regular LDPC codes and effectively suppress the error floor level in the irregular LDPC codes to a very low level.
Even if hardware-oriented LDPC codes with high girth performance have been achieved, efficiently mapping them to a VLSI implementation remains challenging. Several approaches implement the BP algorithm to hardware in a way that each variable node is mapped to a variable processor, each check node is mapped to a check node processor, and all the processors are connected through a Tanner graph interconnection network. This architecture gains high parallelism and high throughputs [7], but is not scalable to LDPC codes with large code length due to the heavy burden of interconnect wires. To elude this problem, partial parallel architectures compromising between the operating speed and interconnection complexity are introduced, in which a certain number of variable nodes and check nodes are mapped to one hardware unit in the time-division multiplexing mode [8]. This approach eases the routing difficulty but at the expense of decreasing parallelism. Furthermore, all the reported implementations up to now are limited to single-rate LDPC code designs. In practice, especially for wireless applications, it is highly desirable that a design scheme could adapt to different coding rates to meet various service requirements and interference conditions.
In this paper, a multi-rate LDPC architecture is presented. This architecture is not only suitable for different regular LDPC coding rates, but also can support irregular LDPC codes. The proposed architecture is demonstrated by implementing a 9k bit, multi-rate LDPC decoder in a Xilinx FPGA device. By configuring two pins of the FPGA device at “00”, “01” or “10”, the decoder works on three coding rate modes: 1/2 as irregular code, 5/8 and 7/8 as regular codes constructed by employing the CE algorithm to suppress the error floor. The designed decoder is tested in an LDPC-OFDM system [8] and achieves the superior measured performance of block error rate below 10-7 at SNR 1.8 dB without the presence of error floor.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The proposed cycle elimination algorithm is presented in Section II. The three rate codes design process and simulation results are described in Section III. The architecture of the multi-rate decoder is presented in Section IV. Measurement results of the implemented FPGA device are shown in Section V. Concluding remarks are made in Section VI.

the base matrix [3]. However, in order to further improve the girth of the expanded matrix, we need to study the relationship between the cycles in the expanded matrix and the cycles in the base matrix. Two issues arise here, 1) Will the short cycles in a base matrix result in a collection of same length cycles in the expanded H matrix? 2) If the answer is yes, then how to eliminate those short cycles? The above two questions are answered in the following, which form the basic idea behind the proposed CE algorithm.
Figure 1. A base matrix with cycles.
In fact, if there exists a length-2g cycle (it has 2g 1s in the cycle path) in the base matrix, this cycle can result in L length2g cycles in the expanded LDPC matrix. For example, in Figure 2, the four 5×5 square matrices represent the square permutation matrices expanded from a length-4 cycle in the base matrix with cyclically shifted values P1,1=1, P1,2=0, P2,1=4, P2,2=3. Clearly there are five length-4 cycles after the expansion.
Figure 2. Illustration of the number of cycles increase after expansion.
Consider two adjacent 1s in the same row of a base matrix located respectively at (i,j) and (i,m). Let their corresponding permutation matrices to be Hi,j and Hi,m, and their respective shifted values to be Pi,j and Pi,m. Then let ∆Pi,j->i,m = Pi,j - Pi,m to be the (cyclically) shifted-value drop from the 1 at location (i,j) to the 1 at location (i,m). As illustrated in Figure 3, the shiftedvalue drop from the 1 at position (1,1) to its neighbor at (1,2) is ∆P1,1->1,2 = P1,1 – P1,2 = 1-0 = 1.

II. CYCLE ELIMINATION ALGORITHM
A. The Idea
Suppose that we already constructed a base matrix shown in Figure 1, which is a 6×12 irregular matrix. If we employ the base matrix expansion method in [3] to construct a large H matrix, every 1 at position (i, j) is expanded to a square permutation L×L (here L=453) matrix, each of which is an identity matrix with rows cyclically shifted by a set of amount Pi,j. The size of the generated LDPC H matrix is 2718×5436. It is obvious that the above matrix expansion is beneficial in terms of error correction performance because the girth of the expanded matrix is always larger than or equal to the girth of

Figure 3. Another illustration of the cycle number increase after expansion.
Furthermore, for two adjacent 1s in the same row (column), we refer to its shifted-value drop as a horizontal (vertical) shifted-value drop. In Figure 3, along each edge, the number

IEEE Globecom 2005

1262

0-7803-9415-1/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:58:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2005 proceedings.

inside a dotted cycle is a vertical shifted-value drop, and the number inside a dotted box is a horizontal shifted-value drop.
Consider a cycle in a base matrix. Let ΣV(∆P) to be the sum of all the vertical shifted-value drops along the cycle. Similarly, let ΣH(∆P) to be the sum of all the horizontal shifted-value drops along the cycle. For example, in Figure 3, the left picture and right picture represent a length-4 cycle and a length-6 cycle in the base matrix. The sum of all the vertical shifted-value drops for the cycle-4 can be computed as: ΣV (∆P)=(-3)+3=0. For the cycle 6, it is ΣV(∆P)=(-1)+(-1)+2=0. Obviously in this case, if each 1 in the cycle-4/cycle-6 is expanded to a L×L square permutation matrix, L length-4/length-6 cycles will be generated in the expanded matrix.
In general, the above scenario can be summarized as the following Lemma, and the detail proof of the Lemma can be found in reference [11]:
Lemma: Any cycle of length 2g in a base matrix will lead to L cycles of length 2g in the expanded matrix, if and only if the sum of all the vertical (horizontal) shifted-value drops along the cycle is equal to k·L, where k=0, ±1, ±2 …±g.
B. Cycle Elimination Algorithm
The above Lemma also leads us to eliminate the cycles after the base matrix expansion, which is the basis of CE program. In the program, a constraint ΣV(∆P) ≠ kL is generated for any cycle detected in the base matrix. Since each 1 in the base matrix may be contained in many cycles, a constraint list is generated from all the cycles containing this 1. The purpose of the CE program is to find suitable Pi,j values for each 1 in the base matrix that could satisfy all the constraint-lists. The algorithm is divided into the following steps:
1) The base matrix is initialized. All Pi,j values are set to zeros and an empty constraint-list is set up for every 1 in the base matrix.
2) During each iteration of the algorithm, a column is picked from the base matrix as the current column (from the order of left to right). This current column divides the base matrix to the left and right parts. All the current-column-related cycles in the right part of the base matrix will then be searched and eliminated through setting the cyclically shifted value P in step 3) and step 4).
3) The cycle searching process is illustrated using the cycle6 in Figure 3. Starting from H(1,1) at the current column, an offspring H(1,2) is obtained, the offspring here is defined as the 1s on the same row or the same column with the ancestor 1. From H(1,2), its offspring H(3,2) is found, and H(3,2) is called the third generation of H(1,1). Exploiting the same idea to H(2,1), which is also located at the current column, a second generation offspring H(2,4) and a third generation offspring H(3,4) are found. Because the two third generations H(3,2) and H(3,4) are on the same row, a cycle-6 is detected and the program backtracks to their ancestors until all 1s in the cycle path are found. Because the cycle searching proceeds only in the right part of the base matrix, all the found cycles are rightside-related with the current column.
4) All the cycles right-side-related to the current column are eliminated through setting of the cyclically shifted values of the

1s in cycle path. Because the number of cycles in the base matrix increases exponentially when the cycle length increases, and the cyclically shifted values P is limited within the ranges [0, L-1]. The cyclically shifted value setting algorithm continues as follows to prevent its quick increase in complexity: if a cycle is found, each 1 in the cycle is checked to see whether its cycle constraints have been met. If not, its P is incremented by one each time until all the constraints are met. After comparing all the P values in the cycle, the 1 with the minimum P value is chosen and its current P value is accepted, while others’ P values are restored to their original values.
III. LDPC CODE DESIGN
Partially parallel decoder architecture [3] is adopted in our design to achieve a balance between the speed and silicon complexity. Furthermore, the partially parallel code is VLSIoriented, and it can be nicely mapped to the partial decoder structure. The partial decoder contains Nb variable node computation units (VNU) and Mb check node computation unit (CNU), which corresponds to the size of the base matrix Mb×Nb. In this section, the design of the three rate codes: 1/2, 5/8 and 7/8 are described in detail.
A. LDPC Code Base Matrix Design
1) Regular rate 5/8 code
A (3, 8) regular LDPC structure is adopted to construct the rate 5/8 code because this structure can provide a good biterror-rate performance for moderate code lengths. According to [8], the base matrix size of the (3, k) structure is 3k×k2. If every 1 in the base matrix is expanded to a L×L square permutation matrix, the H matrix size is 3·k·L×L·k2. Therefore, rate 5/8 base matrix size is 24×64 (3k=24, and k2=64), and every square permutation matrix is 149×149, so the size of the H matrix is 4768×9536. This code structure can be mapped to hardware with 64 VNUs and 24 CNUs, each VNU/CNU contains timemultiplexed L variable nodes and L check nodes, respectively. However, the implementation of 64 VNUs and 24 CNUs would require a heavy hardware cost. So in our architecture, every two VNUs/CNUs are combined and there are a total of 32 VNUs and 12 CNUs in the design. Overall, 2*L=298 clock cycles are needed to complete one VNU computation process and one CNU computation process.
2) Regular rate 7/8 code
(3, 24) regular code structure is used to design the regular rate 7/8 code. The base matrix size is 3·k·L×L·k2=72×576 (3k=72, and k2=576). Every 1 is expanded to an L×L (L=17) square permutation matrix, therefore, the size of the H matrix is 1224×9792. Similarly, every 24 L×L matrix are combined to a VNU and CNU, so the hardware contains 24 VNUs and 3 CNUs. In total, 24*L=408 clock cycles are needed to finish one VNU computation process and one CNU computation process.
3) Irregular rate 1/2 code
Irregular LDPC codes do not outperform regular ones unless their degree distribution is carefully designed. The PEG program [2] is employed to determine the node degree distribution of the base matrix. The designed variable node degree distribution is (2, 2, …, 2, 3,…3, 7,..7).

IEEE Globecom 2005

1263

0-7803-9415-1/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:58:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2005 proceedings.

The H matrix of the irregular 1/2 code contains an 18×36 base matrix, and the square permutation matrix size is 251×251, so the expanded H matrix size is 4518×9036. With each of the square permutation matrix mapped to one VNU/CNU, the hardware contains 36 VNUs and 18 CNUs.

B. Square Permutation Matrix Shifted Value Design
With the above base matrix designed for the three rates, two different methods are employed to determine the cyclically shifted value of every square permutation matrix. One is the CE program described in Section II, the other one is the technique given by Zhang and Parhi [8] (ZP), in which cyclically shifted value P for the 1 at position (i,j) is determined from formula Px,y=(i-1) · j. The detailed parameters of the codes are listed in Table 1.

TABLE 1. CODE DESIGN PARAMETERS.

Rate variale node degree dv Check node degree dc
Code length
Base matrix size
Expanded matrix size L×L Average girth (ZP constructed codes) Average girth (CE constructed codes) CE program run CPU time (minutes)

1/2 2,3 or 7 5 or 6
9036
18×36
251 8.0556
10 22.5

5/8 3 8 9536
24×64
149 8.25 10 18.7

7/8 3 24 9782
72×576
17 5.9132
8 1.13

Seen from Table 1, the codes constructed using ZP method (ZP-constructed codes) have the average girth lengths 8.0556, 8.25 and 5.9132 for rate 1/2, 5/8 and 7/8, respectively. In contrast, the average girths of the codes constructed using the CE method (CE-constructed codes) can be improved to 10, 10 and 8, respectively. With a SUN Fire V480 server with 900MHz UltraSparc-III processors, the CPU time of the three rate codes are 2.5, 18.7 and 1.13 minutes, respectively. It should be noted that for the regular 7/8 case, due to the large base matrix size and the small L value, the constructed code girth is 8.

IV. DECODER ARCHITECTURE

suitable for different rates, but also can be used for both regular and irregular LDPC codes. At the top level, the architecture follows the general idea of [8], but has the following key distinct characteristics in comparison to the previous architectures described in [3][4][5][6][8]:

z It exploits configurable structures for the VNU block, the CNU block and the memory banks so different rate LDPC regular/irregular codes can be fit.

z The Min-Sum with Correction (MSC) algorithm [12] is adopted to replace the normally applied table-lookup quantization method to reduce the large performance loss for irregular codes and high-rate regular codes.

A. Min-Sum with Correction Algorithm

First of all, an efficient way to emulate function (1) is needed because this function is performed frequently for every check node computation.

Ψ ( x ) = Ψ −1( x ) = log( 1 + exp( − | x |) )

(1)

1 − exp( − | x |)

Up to now, most publications on LDPC VLSI implementation employ look-up tables (LUT) to quantize the function. However, the LUT quantization method suffers from the tradeoff between the dynamic range and the precision. Therefore, [12] and [13] presented the min-sum algorithm with correction (MSC) to emulate the function.

To show the MSC performance, both the LUT and MSC methods are used to simulate the three codes in our design. The simulation results are shown in Figure 5. As seen from the curves, the LUT method achieves good results for low-rate regular LDPC codes (for example, regular 5/8 code). But for high rate regular codes (for example, regular 7/8), more than 0.5 dB code gain is lost. For irregular 1/2 codes, the LUT method is unable to converge. Fortunately, the MSC algorithm achieves good results for all the three cases.

Figure 4. The multi-rate decoding architecture.
The developed configurable partial parallel decoder architecture is shown in Figure 4. This architecture is not only

Figure 5. Comparison of LUT and MSC simulation results.

B. Check Node Computation Block
In Check Node Computation Block, each pair of messages needs to be performed by the MSC check function. One check node with degree k following the equation below to obtain the outputs:

i≠n

∑ OUTn = ⊕ INi

i=1−>k

(2)

IEEE Globecom 2005

1264

0-7803-9415-1/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:58:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2005 proceedings.

Every output OUTn is equal to the checking result of all the other k-1 input messages in the check node. In hardware implementations, one natural way to calculate OUTn is to check the other k-1 inputs one by one. But this serial method is time consuming, especially when k is a large number. In our architecture, a multi-layer tree structure is proposed for parallel check node computation. This structure is configured to different rates (with different k).
The first layer of the network contains a set of 4-checknode-computation-units (4CUs). Each 4CU has 4 input messages and 5 computed output messages, as shown in Figure 6. One of the outputs is “OUT-ALL”, which is the checking result of all 4 input messages used in the next layer. Then in the second layer, 4CU sets are connected to a set of 8CUs or 12CUs. The 8CUs and 12CUs can be further connected to form 24CUs or 36CUs in the third layer.

the decoder can operate at three different code modes: irregular 1/2 mode, regular 5/8 mode and regular 7/8 mode.
One of the most challenging problems in the LDPC decoder design is the memory usage since the LDPC code structure requires a large number of parallel working memories to store the exchanged messages. Therefore, a proper partition of the memory blocks to fully utilize the FPGA SelectRAM resources is needed. In our architecture, memory bank and IRAM (used to store intrinsic messages) are the main sources of memory usage. They are carefully partitioned and combined to save the RAM resource. Another challenge of designing a LDPC decoder is the routing congestion caused by the complex toplevel connections. In our implementation, this problem is alleviated by carefully pipelining the data paths between VNU blocks, routers, and CNU blocks. In addition, the critical path delays are minimized, and the decoder is able to operate at the 100MHz clock frequency. At this frequency, the decoder achieves a maximum throughput of 66Mbps for regular 5/8 and 7/8 codes when performing maximum 24 decoding iterations. For the irregular 1/2 LDPC code, more iterations are required for the codes to converge, so maximum decoding iteration number is set to 60, and the maximum 30Mbps throughput has been achieved.

Figure 6. Architecture of a 4-Check-Node-Computation-Unit (4CU).
C. Configurable Routers
1) VNU Router
To have different rate code designs co-exist in one implementation, a VNU router is inserted between the memory bank and the variable node computation block to adapt to different code rates, as shown in Figure 4. This VNU router is configured by a ROM, and this ROM contains three arrays corresponding to the three code rates, where each array describes the node degree distribution of the current rate design.
2) Global Router and Reverse Router
In Figure 4, the global router and reverse router connect VNUs and CNUs together. Seen from the figure, four buses are involved in the message exchanges: “from-VNU”, “to-CNU”, “from-CNU” and “to-VNU”. For each rate mode, two arrays are used to configure how “from-VNU” is permutated and connected to “to-CNU”, and how “from-CNU” is permutated and connected to “to-VNU”. Therefore, a total of six arrays that is stored in a configuration ROM are needed to configure the global router and reverse router to work at three different rate modes.
V. FPGA IMPLEMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT RESULT
A multi-rate LDPC decoder is implemented on a Xilinx Virtex-II XC2V8000 FPGA device. The design is described in VHDL, synthesized using Synplicity tools, placed and routed using Xilinx development tool ISE6.0. It works at the 100MHz clock frequency, and has codeword length about 9k bits. By configuring two pins of the FPGA device at “00”, “10” or “11”,

Figure 7. Measurement comparison between CE and ZP-constructed codes.
The implemented LDPC decoder has been used together with an OFDM chip to form an OFDM-LDPC system [9]. The measurement results of the ZP-constructed codes and CEconstructed codes are compared in Figure 7. In the figure, the block error rate verse SNR curves are plotted. Note that the y axis is the block error rate (block length > 9k), and it is approximately two orders of magnitude higher than the bit error rate. As seen from Figure 7, the ZP-constructed regular 5/8 code achieves the good block error rate performance and does not have the error floor problem. However, the ZPconstructed irregular 1/2 and regular 7/8 codes experience the serious error floor problem at the block error rate of about 10-4. The above phenomena can be explained using the girth histogram shown in Figure 8. In the figure, the variable nodes inside one square permutation matrix have the same girth value. For the ZP-constructed regular 5/8 code, because it is cycle-4 and cycle-6 free, the error floor can be efficiently removed. As to the ZP-constructed irregular 1/2 code, although it is cycle-4 free and has the average girth of 8.0556, the error

IEEE Globecom 2005

1265

0-7803-9415-1/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:58:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE GLOBECOM 2005 proceedings.

floor problem still occurs at a much high level because irregular codes normally have the worse error floor problem than regular codes [14]. Moreover, there exists a tradeoff between the threshold SNR and the error floor bit error rate [15]. In our design, the performance of the irregular 1/2 code is near the Shannon limit, making the error floor to appear at a higher level. For the ZP-constructed regular 7/8 code, its base matrix size is 72×576. It contains a lot of length-4 cycles, and those short cycles are difficult to be eliminated with a very small L value 17.
Figure 8. Girth histogram of the ZP-constructed codes.
To suppress the error floor in irregular 1/2 and regular 7/8 codes, cycle elimination is used to generate the LDPC H matrix, and the average girth values of the three rate codes are improved to 10, 10 and 8, respectively. This can suppress the error floor to a much lower level. Furthermore, the decrease of the error floor does not bring any penalty to the coding gain, and the ZP-constructed codes and the CE-constructed codes have the gain difference within 0.1dB seen from Figure 7.
It should be noted that after cycle elimination, the irregular 1/2 code outperforms the regular 1/2 code by approximate 0.5 dB, achieving a block error rate lower than 10-7 at SNR 1.8 dB. With this superior error correcting ability, the irregular 1/2 mode decoder in our design can be utilized to handle deep fading channels and the worst transmission condition. While the regular 5/8 and 7/8 codes can operate at the requirements of high throughput.
VI. CONCLUSION This paper presented the construction, architecture and VLSI implementation of a 9k bit multi-rate LDPC code decoder. The implementation used a Xilinx XC2V8000 FPGA device. By configuring two pins of the FPGA device at “00”, “01” or “10”, the decoder can work at three different rates: irregular 1/2, regular 5/8 and regular 7/8. To suppress the error floor for the irregular 1/2 code and regular 7/8 code, a cycle elimination (CE) algorithm has been developed. By carefully setting the cyclically shifted value for all the square permutation matrices, the CE algorithm attempts to eliminate the short cycles in an LDPC matrix.

The principle of the CE algorithm is to find and eliminate the short cycles existing in the base matrix. However, it has been pointed out that short cycles are not the main reason causing error floor problem [14][16]. Our future work includes research on how to find the stopping sets, instead of all the short cycles, and eliminate them in the CE algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Campello, D. S. Modha, and S. Rajagopalan, “Designing LDPC Codes Using Bit-Filling”, Proceeding International Conference Communications, Helsinki, Finland, pp. 55-59, 2001.
[2] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs”, Proceeding IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, vol. 2, pp. 995-1001, Nov. 2001.
[3] H. Zhang and T. Zhang, “Design of VLSI Implementation-Oriented LDPC Codes”, Proceeding IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, vol. 1, pp. 670-673, 2003.
[4] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC Code Construction with Flexible Hardware Implementation”, Proceeding IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 2708-2712, 2003.
[5] A. Delvarathinam, E. Kim, and G. Choi, “Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder Architecture for High Throughput Optical Fiber Channels”, Proceeding International Conference on Computer Design, pp. 520-525, 2003.
[6] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. R. Kschischang, “Decoder-first Code Design”, Proceeding International Symposium Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, pp. 459-462, Sept. 2001.
[7] A.J. Blanksby and C.J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, Rate-1/2 Low-Density Parity-Check Code Decoder”, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404-412, Mar. 2002.
[8] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI Implementation-Oriented (3,k)Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, Proceeding IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp. 25-36, Sept. 2001.
[9] G. Xing, M. Shen, H. Liu, et al., “An LDPC-based Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcasting (TMB) System: Design, Implementation and Experimental Results", Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 4, pp. 17-21, May 2004.
[10] G. Xing, M. Shen, H. Liu, et al., “An LDPC-based Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcasting (TMB) System: Design, Implementation and Experimental Results", Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 4, pp. 17-21, May 2004.
[11] L. Yang, H. Liu and C.-J. Richard Shi, “Code Construction and FPGA Implementation of Capacity-Approaching Low-Error-Floor Multi-Rate Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder”, submitted to IEEE Transaction on Circuits and Systems.
[12] A. Anastasopoulos, “A Comparison between the Sum-Product and the Min-Sum Iterative Detection Algorithms Based on Density Evolution”, Proceeding IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, vol. 2, pp. 25-29, Nov. 2001.
[13] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Efficient Implementation of the Sum-Product Algorithm for Decoding LDPC Codes”, Proceeding IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, vol. 2, pp. 1036-1036, Nov. 2001.
[14] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes with Low Error Floors”, Proceeding IEEE International Conference on Communication, vol. 5, pp. 3125-3129, May 2003.
[15] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IEEE Transaction on Information Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[16] T. Richardson, "Error Floors of LDPC codes," Proceeding of 41st Allerton Conference on Communications, Control and Computing, Oct. 2003.

IEEE Globecom 2005

1266

0-7803-9415-1/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:58:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

