IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

1977

Transactions Letters________________________________________________________________

On Maximum-Length Linear Congruential-Sequences-Based Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Jing Sun, Member, IEEE, and Oscar Y. Takeshita, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This letter extends a low-density parity-check code construction using maximum-length linear congruential sequences by Prabhakar and Narayanan. The corresponding bipartite graphs of their construction were guaranteed to have a girth larger than four by a sufficient condition. However, their sufficient condition was limited to regular codes and data-node degree equal to three. The extension in this letter allows arbitrary data-node degrees and is applicable to irregular codes. Further, simpler sufficient conditions are derived and larger girths are addressed.
Index Terms—Error-correction coding, graph theory, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, permutation, sequences.

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have been shown to achieve near-Shannon-bound performance

under iterative decoding as the frame size goes to infinity [1],

[2]. An LDPC code is defined by a sparse

parity-check

matrix , and can be represented by a bipartite graph. In

the graph, there are data nodes and check nodes, each

corresponding to a column or row in . The degrees of the

data nodes ( for

) and check nodes ( for

) equal to the corresponding column and row

weights. A data node is connected to check node if and

only if

.

There are two types of LDPC codes. A regular ( , ) LDPC

code has identical data-node degree and check-node degree

. An irregular LDPC code can be described by the degree

distribution, which is defined by two polynomials

(1)
Here, and are the maximum data-node degree and check-node degree, respectively, and and are the ratios

Paper approved by W. E. Ryan, the Editor for Modulation, Coding, and Equalization of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received October 30, 2003; revised August 18, 2004 and June 6, 2005. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-00752219 and Grant ANI-9809018. This paper was presented in part at the 41st Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, October 2003.
J. Sun is with Qualcomm Incorporated, San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: jingsun@qualcomm.com).
O. Y. Takeshita is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA (e-mail: takeshita.3@osu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.860093

of branches that are connected to degree data nodes or check

nodes. A regular LDPC code is a special case of an irregular

LDPC code, such that the degree distribution is

and

.

There are many LDPC code constructions in the literature.

Some are of pseudorandom nature; MacKay et al. proposed

some constructions concatenating small random permutation

matrices to form parity-check matrices of regular [3] and irreg-

ular [4] LDPC codes. A bit-filling method is proposed in [5],

which basically generates the columns of the parity-check ma-

trix randomly under some constraints. Some deterministic con-

structions have also been studied; LDPC codes based on finite

geometry or combinatorial designs are investigated in [6]–[10].

These methods usually guarantee that the girth of the graph as-

sociated to the code is at least six, where girth is defined as the

length of the shortest loop in a graph.

A simple method to define an LDPC code is by an interleaver

[4]. The output branches of all data nodes and all check nodes

are numbered from zero to

, respectively, where is

the total number of branches. An interleaver is then used

to connect a data-node side label to a check-node side label

.

Prabhakar and Narayanan proposed an interleaver-based

deterministic construction of regular LDPC codes [11]. The

construction uses maximal-length linear congruential se-

quences (MLLCS), defined as

(2)

where , , and are integer parameters in the range of

. It is shown in [12] that an MLLCS can be

formed if is relatively prime to ,

is a multiple of

for every prime dividing , and if is a multiple of four,

then

is also a multiple of four. Given an MLLCS ,

the interleaver required in the LDPC code construction can

be formed by using

for

.A

sufficient condition is derived for a regular LDPC code with

to have girth larger than four in [11]. They additionally

show by computer simulations that the constructed LDPC

codes achieve similar error-rate performance as a randomly

constructed LDPC code with the same girth.

In this letter, we develop two sufficient conditions on the girth

of irregular LDPC codes using MLLCS. Regular LDPC codes

are included as special cases. The first sufficient condition con-

tains as a particular case the sufficient condition in [11], and has

a much simpler proof. The second sufficient condition is tighter

and ensures girth larger than six.

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:56:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

The letter is organized as follows. In Section II, MLLCSbased construction of an LDPC code is analyzed. In Section III, sufficient conditions for girths larger than six are developed and design examples are given. Finally, we draw our conclusions in Section IV.

II. LOOPS IN MLLCS-BASED LDPC CODES

An MLLCS is defined as shown in (2). However, after some

simple manipulations, for the nontrivial case with

, we

can write as

(3)

where is uniquely determined by .

Our target is to select parameters such that no length- loop

exists for small . Before we proceed, it is useful to state some sufficient conditions to check whether a loop of length is Fig. 1. Comparison of LDPC codes.

not formed. First, for an LDPC code with degree distribution as

in (1), two branches with check-node side labels and are Theorem 3: For a regular ( , ) MLLCS-based LDPC

connected to distinct check nodes if

. For the code with even

, the condition 1) in Theorem 1 can

length-four loop case, if , , , and are check-node side be reduced to checking

instead of

labels and branches and are connected to a given check

.

node (or at least,

), then the other pair of It can be easily verified that if Theorem 3 is applied to the

branches and are connected to different check nodes if regular (3, ) LDPC code, it contains the sufficient condition

or

in [11].

. These sufficient conditions can be further extended Using these theorems, we can find an MLLCS that satisfies

to larger loops, and similar sufficient conditions can be derived a given girth requirement for a given frame size. For example,

when and are data-node side labels. These statements can for a rate-1/2 irregular LDPC code with

and degree

be proved easily using triangular inequality.

distribution

In the following, we define

. Then

, and is coprime to . We will also frequently use the

binomial identity

. All the computations

are modulo if not otherwise specified.

(4)

we find that for

, the corresponding graph has

girth six. For a regular (3,6) LDPC code with

, the

girth is six for

.

III. SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR GIRTH

Good MLLCS-based interleavers are not always possible for

all . Let

, where are distinct prime num-

In this section, we develop two sufficient conditions for the

girth of an LDPC code. The proofs of these results are given in

the Appendix.

Using the representation of the MLLCS in (3), we develop a

sufficient condition for girth larger than four.

Theorem 1: An MLLCS-based LDPC code with de-

gree distribution (1) have girth larger than four if: 1)

, where

, for

; and

2) for any

,

for all

.

We have an even tighter sufficient condition to guarantee that

no length- loop exists.

Theorem 2: An MLLCS-based LDPC code with degree dis-

tribution (1) has no length- loop if for all and ,

: 1) if

,

; and 2)

if

, the greatest common divisor of and

does not divide

, where

bers. By using the conditions for a linear congruential sequence

to be maximum length in Section I, it can be easily shown that

divides and

. Intu-

itively, when

or

is too small, the regularity

of the MLLCS-based interleaver is too strong, and the perfor-

mance of the induced LDPC code is bad. Therefore, we prefer

to have that can be decomposed into many prime factors (in-

cluding repeated factors), and at least one of the prime factors

with relatively high multiplicity. The choice of needs to guar-

antee that both

and

are relatively large.

Our sufficient conditions usually provide more candidate

MLLCS than the sufficient condition in [11]; this leaves more

space for further optimizations. Moreover, for certain code

parameters, our sufficient conditions provide valid MLLCS that

the sufficient condition in [11] cannot. A regular (4,8) LDPC

code was constructed as an example. Because

, the

interleaver is not covered by [11], which requires

. The

code has nominal rate 1/2 and length 1120. The true dimension

of the code is 566. The parameters are

and

.

The bit-error rate (BER) performance1 is compared in Fig. 1

. For regular LDPC codes, Theorem 1 can be tightened.

1The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is computed using the nominal rate of the code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:56:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

1979

Fig. 2. Graph representations of a length-four loop.

with a regular (4,8) LDPC code based on balanced incomplete block design (BIBD) [13]. The maximum number of decoding iterations using the sum-product algorithm was set to 100 (the same as in [13]). The BER performance curves are very similar. No error floor is observed down to below a BER of . Additionally, no low-weight codewords were detected via undetected frame errors. All errors were due to detectable frame errors (145 frame errors at 3.00 dB and 63 frame errors at 3.20 dB). No low-weight near-codewords [14] were detected.

m Fig. 3. Length-2 loop.

Using

, and expanding terms in the form of

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this letter, we extend the work in [1] that uses MLLCSs to construct LDPC codes. Our novel extensions handle arbitrary data-node degrees, apply to irregular LDPC codes, and address larger girths for the associated graphs. Regular LDPC codes are treated as particular cases of irregular ones. The proofs for our sufficient conditions are more straightforward than the proof in [1]. We show that an example code that is not constructible by [11] yields a BER curve similar to that of a code using the BIBD construction [13]. No error floor is seen down to below a BER of . Finally, a fine feature of Prabhakar and Narayanan’s construction is the simplicity of the code description, implying a natural structure of the parity-check matrix; for the regular case, we conjecture that the codes are quasi-cyclic.

(6)

The first term is a multiple of modulo . In the second term,

let

, then

.

When

, a sufficient condition for a length-four loop not

to be formed is

.

This condition implies that

. Due to symmetry, it

is enough to consider

. This is the first

condition in the theorem.

When

,

and

.

Since the first term in (6) is a multiple of and

by

the previous condition, the only case that

is when

.

We need to find the condition where this cannot happen, i.e.,

when

. Since

APPENDIX

Proof of Theorem 1

A length-four loop is shown in Fig. 2. A parallel branch is

a special length-four loop such that

and

. We only need to develop a sufficient condition to avoid

length-four loops. Assume

,

,

and

. In order for no length-four loop to

exist, it is sufficient to show that

. By triangular

inequality, it is further enough to show that

(7)

. Without loss

of generality, we can assume

,

.

We need

for all

,

which is the second condition in the theorem. This concludes

our proof.

Proof of Theorem 2
A general length- loop is shown in Fig. 3. For this loop, we can write equations

(5)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:56:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(8a)

1980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005

(8b)
(8c) After some straightforward manipulations, equations in (8) can be combined as
(9) which is a function of , with parameters and ,
. In order for no length- loop to exist, it is sufficient that for any and , there is no solution of for (9), which is summarized in the statement of the theorem.
Proof of Theorem 3 We start from (6). Equation (6) can be rewritten as

The first term is a multiple of . When

, we must have

, and

for some

the second term of (10) becomes

(10)

,

,

and . Then

(11)

If

is even, (11) is a multiple of , and so is the first term

of (10). Then for

, the sufficient condition in

Theorem 1 can be reduced to

, which is equivalent to

. This is a weaker condition than

for

, which is already included

in Theorem 1. Thus when

is even, we only need to check

in Theorem 1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the reviewers whose comments strengthened this letter. The second author thanks the Ohio Supercomputer Center.

REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[5] J. Campello, D. S. Modha, and S. Rajagopalan, “Designing LDPC codes using bit-filling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., 2001, pp. 55–59.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] J. L. Kim, U. N. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, and V. Pless, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes of girth at least six,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., 2002, pp. 1024–1031.
[8] K. Mellinger, “LDPC codes from triangle-free line sets,” in Proc. 3rd Pythagorean Conf., Rhodes, Greece, 2003, pp. 341–350.
[9] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Construction of low-density paritycheck codes from Kirkman triple systems,” in Proc. GLOBECOM, Nov. 2001, pp. 970–974.
[10] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[11] A. Prabhakar and K. Narayanan, “Pseudo-random construction of lowdensity parity-check codes using linear congruential sequence,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 1389–1396, Sep. 2002.
[12] G. C. Clark, Jr. and J. B. Cain, Error-Correction Coding for Digital Communications. New York: Plenum, 1981.
[13] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268, Jun. 2004.
[14] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan–Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Elsevier Sci. Electron. Notes Theoret. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 1–8, 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:56:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

