XVI International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (Redundancy 2019)

On the performance analysis of short LDPC codes

Luiza R. Medova Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology Institute for Information Transmission Problems Russian Academy of Science
Moscow, Russia Email: luiza.medova@phystech.edu

Pavel S. Rybin Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology Institute for Information Transmission Problems Russian Academy of Science
Moscow, Russia Email: prybin@iitp.ru

Ivan V. Filatov Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Moscow, Russia Email: ivfilatov@mail.ru

Abstract—This paper presents the research on LDPC codes performance depending on several Tanner graph properties. We have simulated 2250 (128,256) different LDPC codes in FPGA and explored their waterfall region as a function of the graph characteristics. These characteristics are different graph centralization measures and the second smallest Laplacian eigenvalue. We have received numerical values that distinguish LDPC codes with a good decoding threshold (less or equal 3.5 dB) from others. In addition, we developed a polynomial regression model that accurately predicts the LDPC decoding threshold with a coefficient of determination equal to 0.87 and RMSE equal 0.16 dB.
Index Terms—Low-density parity check codes(LDPC), Tanner graph, Laplacian matrix, graph centrality, graph centralization, eigenvalues, polynomial regression.
I. INTRODUCTION
The low-density parity-check (LDPC) [1] codes are a class of linear block codes, constructed from a sparse bipartite Tanner graph [2]. The decoding of an LDPC code [3] involves the passing of messages between the nodes along the edges in the Tanner graph. Each of the nodes in the Tanner graph works in isolation, with information available along the connected edges only. The decoding performance of the LDPC codes depends on the topological properties of the Tanner graph. We consider a graph to be a description of the paths along which messages flow. Centrality measures [4] are popular interpretations that make assumptions about the manner in which messages flow through a graph. The centrality is a measure of how central is the position of an individual node within a graph. The most widely used centrality measures in network analysis are degree centrality, betweenness centrality, closeness centrality, and eigenvector centrality [5]. While centrality measures compare the importance of a node within a graph, the associated notion of centralization, as introduced in [6], allows us to compare the relative importance of nodes within their respective graphs. The graph centralization is related to the compactness of the graph and to what extent there is a small number of highly central nodes. The graph centralization is equal to zero if all nodes demonstrate the same centrality and is greater than zero in other cases.
Centrality measures of single nodes can be extremely helpful for LDPC codes construction using the PEG algorithm. In

[7], a new PEG algorithm based on the betweenness centrality metric is proposed. In modern communication systems, LDPC codes with quasi-cyclic (QC) structure (QC-LDPC codes, [8]) are widely used due to their effective hardware implementation. QC-LDPC codes are constructed from the protographs using cyclic permutations. The parity check matrice is partially composed of circulant submatrices. Shift values are selected using the ACE method ([9],[10]). It is impossible to check all shifts for a non-zero position at the protograph parity-check matrix. Therefore we randomly choose an LDPC protograph and apply a greedy algorithm to circulant shifts several times. That leads to the fact that the error correction performance for QC-LDPC codes constructed from the same protograph may be quite different. The question of the protograph selection also remains open. That’s why it’s an important task to find basic, easily calculated parameters of parity-check matrices and corresponding graphs that make it possible to predict the LDPC codes performance. These parameters can be used as additional criteria for QC-LDPC codes construction using the ACE method without additional simulation being necessary.
In our work, we focused on the Tanner graph centralizations of LDPC codes. We have simulated 2250 (128,256) LDPC codes by means of hardware simulation and explored the dependence of iterative decoding threshold on different graph centralization measures. We also took into account the graph connectivity that can be characterized by the second smallest Laplacian eigenvalue of a graph. We have received that the graph centralities combined with the second smallest Laplacian eigenvalue are well correlated with LDPC codes error correction performance and help to highlight the LDPC codes with a big or small decoding threshold.
II. GRAPH CENTRALIZATION MEASURES
A. LDPC codes
An LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a a (r,n) sparse parity-check matrix denoted by H. The n columns of the parity-check matrix H correspond to coded bits, and the r rows correspond to parity-check equations. The paritycheck matrix can also be represented by a bipartite graph, called a Tanner graph of the code [2]. The bipartite graph

978-1-7281-194A4u-th1o/r1iz9e/d$l3ic1en.0se0d ©us2e 0lim1i9tedIEtoE:EYonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1un8e 24,2026 at 10:48:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XVI International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (Redundancy 2019)

consists of two sets of nodes, namely the set of variablenodes, corresponding to coded bit (columns of H), and the set of check-nodes correspond to parity-check equations (rows of H). The edges connecting variable and check nodes correspond to the 1’sentries of H. Fig.1 shows the bipartite Tanner graph representation.
Fig. 1 – The bipartite Tanner graph of an LDPC codes A Tanner graph can be described with a matrix called the adjacency matrix A [11], which in the simplest case is an N × N symmetric matrix, where N is the number of vertices in the network. The adjacency matrix A = (Ai,j) has elements

It is expected that highly connected nodes are at the center of the network, but really it is not. Degree centrality can be considered as a local centrality measure that ignores the vertex’s involvement in indirect relationships.
2) Eigenvector centrality: The eigenvector centrality is a more sophisticated version of the idea of the degree centrality [13]. Where degree centrality gives a simple count of the number of connections a node has, eigenvector centrality acknowledges that not all connections are equal. In general, connections to nodes that are themselves influential will lend a node more influence than connections to less influential nodes. Let the eigenvector centrality of the node i be Xi. Xi can be calculated by making the degree centrality proportional to the average of the centralities of i s network neighbors:

1n

Xi = λ Aij xj ,

(4)

i=1

If x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn) is the vector of centralities, the equation (4) can be rewritten in matrix form:

1, if there is an edge between nodes i and j. Ai,j := 0, otherwise.

If r and n are the size ot the parity check matrix H, then the adjacency matrix A for an LDPC code is a (r + n) × (r + n) matrix, that is defined as:

0H

A = HT 0 .

(1)

B. Graph centralities

Centrality measure indicates which node takes up a critical position in one whole network. The term centrality can be applied to the whole graph [12]. The centrality of an entire graph should index the tendency of a single node to be more central than all other nodes in the graph. Measures of a graph centrality of this type are based on differences between the centrality of the most central node and that of all others. Thus, they are indexes of the centralization of the network. The graph centralization can be calculated as the differences between the centrality scores of the most central point and those of all other points:

C(G) = (max cw − cv),

(2)

w

v

where cv is the centrality measure of a node v. In that work we calculated degree, eigenvector, closeness and betweenness

centrality measures for 2250 graphs constructed from LDPC

codes and then found the graph centralization. Since the

size of explored LDPC codes is 128 × 256, the size of its

adjacency matrix A is 384×384, and the corresponding graph

G has 384 nodes.

1) Degree centrality: Degree centrality is the most simple

centrality measure. It refers to the number of edges incident

with a node. The degree centrality of a node i is defined as

[6]:

CD(i) = Aij.

(3)

j

λx = Ax

(5)

Since the centralities should be non-negative, λ must be the largest eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix and x the corresponding eigenvector. Thus, the eigenvector centrality defined in this way accords each node a centrality that depends both on the number and the quality of its connections: having a large number of connections still counts for something, but a node with a smaller number of high-quality contacts may outrank one with a larger number of mediocre contacts.
3) Closeness centrality: Closeness centrality is a global centrality measure that estimates how fast the flow of information would be through a given node to other nodes. A node that has a high degree centrality but low closeness centrality is embedded in a cluster that is far from the rest of the whole graph. A node with low degree centrality but high closeness centrality is connected with influential nodes.
Let d(i, j) be the length of the shortest path between nodes i and j, and N be the number of nodes. Then closeness centrality is calculated as:

N −1

CC (i) = j,j=i d(i, j)

(6)

The assumption of the closeness centrality is that nodes that are important are going to be a short distance away from all other nodes in the network.
4) Betweenness centrality: Betweenness centrality differs from the other centrality measures. A vertex can have quite a low degree, be connected to others that have a low degree, even be a long way from others on average, and still have a high betweenness. The low degree and high betweenness for a node mean that the node’s few links are crucial for the network flow. The low betweenness for a high degree node means that the node’s connections are redundant.
For every pair of vertices in a connected graph, there exists at least one shortest path between the vertices such that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1un9e 24,2026 at 10:48:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XVI International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (Redundancy 2019)

number of edges that the path passes through is minimized.

The betweenness centrality for each vertex is the number of

these shortest paths that pass through the vertex. Let σi,j be

the total number of shortest paths from node i to node j

and σi,j(v) is the number of those paths that pass through v. The following expression gives the betweenness centrality

of a node v:

CB (v)

=

i=v=j

σi,j (v) σi,j

(7)

Thus, a node with higher betweenness centrality would have more control over the network, because more information will pass through that node.

C. The graph connectivity
Here we describe the measure for the Tanner graph connectivity. The graph connectivity can be calculated with graph Laplacian eigenvalues. The Laplacian matrix for Tanner graph is described in [14]. Consider the Tanner graph depicted in the fig. 1. The Tanner graph can be redrawn with only variable or check nodes.

performance analysis of LDPC codes under iterative, messagepassing decoding algorithms.
III. RESULTS
We have calculated the described centralities and have found the corresponding centralization. The betweenness and eigenvector centralizations turned out to be highly correlated (correlation coefficient is 0.97). Therefore we have considered only betweenness centralization. The correlation coefficients between other centralization don’t exceed 0.5. Using the hardware implementation, we have found the LDPC decoding threshold as the level of 1e-3 of the Bit Error Rate (BER) curve. The fig.4 represent the relationships between the LDPC decoding threshold and centralization measures. As can be seen from fig.4, there is no linear relationship, so the LDPC codes performance can’t be predicted with a single centralization measure.

Fig. 2 – Tanner graph redrawn with only variable nodes

Spectral graph theory, looking at the eigenvalues of the graph Laplacian, can tell us not just whether a graph is connected, but also how well its connected. Fig.2 shows the Tanner graph redrawn with only variable nodes (V-graph). It is a unipartite graph that shows the two-hop links among the variable nodes as one-hop links. For example, the variable node v1 is connected with variable nodes v3 and v6 through the check node c1. The Laplacian matrix L = (Li,j) for the Tanner graph can be written from the V-graph in the following way:



deg(vi), i = j, 

Li,j := −1,

if i = j and vi is adjacent to vj , (8)

0,

otherwise.

The Laplacian matrix shows the connection between all the variable nodes as well as the degree of each variable node. The second smallest Laplacian eigenvalue λ2 of graphs is important information contained in the spectrum of a graph ([15], [16]). This eigenvalue is related to several important graph invariants, and it has been extensively investigated. It was discovered recently that graphs with large λ2 (with respect to the maximal degree) have some properties which make them be very useful objects in several applications [16]. It shows the algebraic connectivity of the graph what is important for the

Fig. 3 – The dependence of LDPC decoding threshold on λ2
The fig.3 shows the dependence of LDPC decoding threshold (the level of BER equal to 1-3) on the smallest Laplacian eigenvalue λ2. The smallest λ2 is near zero and the largest λ2 is 16.533. The LDPC codes with λ2 ≥ 9 have the decoding threshold is smaller or equal 3.5 dB. Further, we have looked at the LDPC codes performance in relation to λ2 together with centralization measures. The fig.5 illustrates that there are LDPC codes with small λ2 but still with good performance. Consider the plot of λ2 and betweeness centralization. 713 LDPC codes with λ2 ≥ 4 and normalized BC ≤ 0.15 have the decoding threshold ≤ 3.5 dB. The similar relations of degree and closeness centralization measures are also calculated and given in the table I. The largest and the smallest values mean a range of centralities values. The next two columns determine the range of centrality and λ2 values that identify LDPC codes with a decoding threshold ≤ 3.5 dB.
To estimate the decoding threshold, we have applied secondorder polynomial regression. To test the polynomial model’s ability to predict the performance of new LDPC codes, we have used 5-fold cross-validation. The average RMSE (Root Mean Square Error) = 0.16 ± 0.01 dB and R2 score (the coefficient of determination) = 0.87 ± 0.01. As an example, the fig.6 shows the BER performance of some LDPC codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2un0e 24,2026 at 10:48:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XVI International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (Redundancy 2019)

Fig. 4 – The LDPC decoding threshold and centralization measures

Fig. 5 – The relationships between λ2 and centralization measures

Betweenness centralization
Closeness centralization
Degree centralization

the largest value
0.067
0.023
0.035

the smallest value
0.0086
0.0037
0.0087

the largest value between good LDPC codes 0.015
0.01
0.02
Table I

the smallest λ2 between good LDPC
codes 4
4.5
4.5

number of good LDPC codes
713
675
686

obtained by means of hardware simulation. The thresholds predicted with constructed regression are marked with crosses.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have explored the waterfall region of the LDPC codes as a function of several graph features. It was found that the LDPC decoding threshold depends on the second smallest Laplacian eigenvalue λ2 and centralization measures. These results can be used as criteria for the construction and selection of parity check matrices under PEG algorithm [17]. The second-order polynomial model accurately predicts the decoding thresholds and is useful for estimation the LDPC code performance.
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The reported study was supported by Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, contract No.03.G25.31.0222 and RFBR, research projects No. 18-0701409, No. 18-37-00322, No. 18-37-00319 and No. 19-0100364.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 2128,, 1962.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533547, 1981.
[3] R. U. T. Richardson, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message- passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599618, 2001.
[4] F. H. P Hage, Islands networks. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[5] S. Borgatti, “Centrality and network flow,” Social Networks, 27, 55-71., 2005.
[6] L. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification,” Social networks, pp. 215-239, 1979.
[7] K. S. Insah Bhurtah, P. C. Catherine, “A peg construction of ldpc codes based on the betweenness centrality metric,” Advances in Electrical and Computer Engineerin, pp. 85-92, 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2un1e 24,2026 at 10:48:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XVI International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (Redundancy 2019)

sim. threshold = 2.97, pred. threshold = 2.91

-1.5

sim. threshold = 3.57, pred. threshold = 3.64

sim. threshold = 4.67, pred. threshold = 4.59

sim. threshold = 4.87, pred. threshold = 4.81

sim. threshold = 4.37, pred. threshold = 3.97

-2

-2.5

BER

-3

-3.5

-4 1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

SNR

Fig. 6 – BER performance of LDPC codes and predicted decoding thresholds

[8] M. P. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 17881793, 2004.
[9] J. V. T. Tian, C. Jones and R. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular ldpc code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242 1247., 2004.
[10] A. D. D. Vukobratovic, “Ace spectrum of ldpc codes and generalized ace design,” Proc. IEEE ICC, pp. 665 670., 2007.
[11] N. Biggs, “Algebraic graph theory,” Cambridge Mathematical Library (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, Definition 2.1, p. 7., 1993.
[12] Y. J.Zhang1, “Degree centrality, betweenness centrality, and closeness centrality in social network,” International Conference on Modelling, Simulation and Applied Math-

ematics, 2017. [13] M. E. J. Newman, “The mathematics of networks,” In:
Palgrave Macmillan (eds) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2008. [14] M. V. K. Namuduri and B. Buckles, “A link between consensus building and low density parity check decoding,” 49th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and systems (CISS), 2015. [15] F. R. K. Chung, “Lectures on spectral graph theory,” American Methematical Society, 1997. [16] B. Mohar, “The laplacian spectrum of graphs,” Graph Theory, Combinatorics, and Applications, vol. 2,pp. 871898., 1991. [17] X. H. D.M. Arnold, E. Eleftheriou, “Progressive edgegrowth tanner graphs,” Proc. IEEE Global Telecomm. Conference, pp. 995-1001, 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2un2e 24,2026 at 10:48:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

