The Optimized Scheme for FPGA-based LDPC codes using Particle Swarm Optimization
Dong-Hee Noh∗, Sung-Hwan Jeong∗, JuHwan Choi∗ ∗Software Convergence Cluster, Korea Electronics Technology Institute (KETI), Jeonju, South Korea
{dhee.noh, shjeong, netside}@keti.re.kr

Abstract—This paper proposes the enhanced BP decoding scheme of Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes scheme using Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm. New approaches to this paper describe the BP decoding scheme using PSO algorithm. Its scheme can optimize the degree distribution pairs of check and variable node over rician channel. Therefore, proposed scheme can improve the throughput performance for wireless sensor networks over the industrial environment such as military or agriculture application.
Index Terms—LDPC, BP Decoding, Decoding Complexity, PSO algorithm, Wireless Sensor Network.

I. INTRODUCTION
Owing to the congestion control performance, wireless network over TCP assumes a relatively reliable underlying network. However, packet losses some times occur due to unreliable wireless links in specific industrial environments such as agricultural or smart factory system. these reasons, robustness and reliability become critical issues in the wireless sensor network. In wireless networks, its system collects a wide variety of environmental data and transmit the actuator control which owing to maintain these essential climate factors. In those cases, environments in the greenhouse such as temperature and humidity can be affected by the packet transmission failures [1]. Therefore, its climate factors can be seriously affected by the variety of AWGN levels.
The low-density parity-check (LDPC) code has known as an efficient error correction method [2], [3]. The LDPC coding scheme is a feasible method approach Shannon-limit performance with low complexity through Belief propagation(BP) algorithm with the factor graph of the code [4]. These BP algorithms are used in graphical form using a Tanner graph, which is consists of check nodes and variable nodes. These methods show BP decoding can be applied for sequential scheduling schemes for improving LDPC performance compared to the flooding scheduling [5]. The main disadvantage of LDPC codes is their highly encoding complexity. But, an efficient solution of this problem is presented to [2].
A flocking algorithm is a form of collective behavior with flight a group of birds. This algorithm is related to the behavior of birds in which to select their pattern of movements. This scheme is based on three rules which are proposed by Reynolds [6]: flock centering, collision avoidance and velocity matching. A flocking behavior can easily steer towards common defined value without each node collision. To normalize of layered BP decoding procedure in LDPC codes,

Fig. 1: PSO algorithm : Velocity component construction.

several papers have been focused on the flocking-algorithm [7], [8].
The main contribution of this paper is the possibilities to decrease the latency with higher decoding performance. Therefore, the proposed paper investigates the possibility with real-time systems in wireless networks, through the use of flocking algorithm such as Bio-inspired algorithm. In other words, the proposed paper can expect to obtain a higher convergence speed ratio using flocking-algorithm.

II. PRELIMINARY THEORY

A. Degree Distribution

In this paper, we focus on the Irregular LDPC codes over rician channel. In the case of irregular LDPC codes, each node (check and variable) have a different degree. The check and variable node degrees have effect on the node distribution. The degree distribution of variable nodes can denoted by λ (x). Its degree distribution can be expressed as

dv

λ (x) = λixi−1

(1)

i=2

where check node and variable degree denoted by dc, dv respectively. Moreover, λi is the fraction of edges emanating from variable nodes degree i.
The degree distribution of check nodes can also similarly denoted by ρ (x). Its degree distribution can be expressed as

dc

ρ (x) = ρixi−1

(2)

i=2

978-1-7281-0893-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

623

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:50:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ICTC 2019

where ρi is the fraction of edges emanating from check nodes degree i.

B. Threshold effect of LDPC codes
The noise threshold effect is a major factor in determining the LDPC code performance. If the channel noise level is less than the threshold of a certain noise level and the block size goes to the infinity, the ensemble code bit error probability converges to zero. On the other hand, if the noise level in the channel is bigger than the noise threshold, the probability of bit error is bounded away from zero.
Therefore, the noise threshold is an important parameter that determines the performance of the LDPC code. In particular, the technique of optimizing an irregular LDPC code is to find the noise threshold of the largest possible magnitude within a given channel. The LDPC ensemble noise thresholds defined by degree distribution pairs can be obtained through the DDE algorithm.

C. Rician Channel

In this paper, we propose a method for optimizing irregular LDPC codes through Rician channels. If code symbol parameters x is mapped into the rician channel signal w = 2x + 1, the conditional PDF of matched filter output y is

p

y w, a

= √ 1 exp 2πσ

(y − 2a)2 − 2σ2

(3)

where, a is the normalized fading factor with E a2 = 1. The density function p (a) is

p (a) = 2a (1 + γ) exp −a2 (1 + γ) − γ I0 2a γ (1 + γ) (4)
where, γ is the energy ratio of direct path to diffract path and I0 is the zero order bessel function.

III. PSO ALGORITHM
The Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm is a stochastic optimization scheme based on the classification method which is developed by Eberhart and Kennedy in 1995. The main objective of the PSO algorithm finds the optimal solution likes Generic algorithm (GA). Unlike GA scheme, the PSO scheme does not need some evolution operators such as crossover or mutation. The other advantages of PSO compare with GA scheme are the implementation simplicity and the fewer adjustable parameters. Figure 1 presents the basic modeling of PSO algorithm in detail.
The PSO algorithm is an optimization algorithm that finds the optimal solution to solve the maximization problem through self-learning. The PSO algorithm is derived from the flocking behavior of particles such as bird fish and insect. In this optimization scheme, every single solution is defined as “bird” in the search space which is also defined as “particle”.
Each particle represents a single potential solution controlled by three-particle factors, position, velocity, and fitness value. Moreover, it can be applied to fields that are attracting

Fig. 2: The Diagram of Proposed Scheme.
much attention which difficult to solve by existing algorithms because the execution speed is faster than evolutionary operation. To calculate the optimal solution, each particle adjusts the velocity according to the search experience among of previous own particle.
Therefore, the position and velocity update during iteration times i as shown in (5), (6) as.
υi+1 = ωxi + c1r1 {P − xi} + c2r2 {G − xi} , (5) xi+1 = xi + υi+1. (6)
where i denotes iteration number, x (i) is the current particle (solution or position of a particle), and ω is the inertia weight factor. The parameters c1 defines the self-confidence (cognitive) factors, while c2 is swarm confidence (social) factors. The r1, r2 are random numbers uniformly distributed in the

624
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:50:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

interval [0, 1]. P is the personal best solution of corresponding

particle and G is the global best solution for the whole swarm.

30

25
IV. PROPOSED OPTIMIZATION SCHEME

Normal BP decoding scheme Proposed Scheme

Number of Errors (bits)

In this section, the optimized decoding scheme which uses the PSO explains how it can reduce the decoding complexity efficiently. More specifically, Its proposed scheme can optimizes the degree distribution of check nodes ρ (x), variable nodes λ (x) respectively. The proposed scheme can be explained as Figure 2.
In this paper, we proposed the enhanced PSO algorithm to modify the velocities of particle using Equation (3) as follows :
νi+1 = wνi+1 + c1rand () (Pi − xi) + c2rand () (Gi − xi) . (7)

20
15
10
5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Number of Iteration
Fig. 3: Performance Comparison of Decoding Complexity over Rician channel.

where, rand () of Pi, Gi are uniformly distribution random value in [−1, 1].
We assumes that the optimization parameters, ρ (x) and λ (x), is defined as the probability vector and it has folllowing constrains as

dv

dc

λi = ρi = 1

(8)

i=2

i=2

After that, we calculate the cost function which minimizes the gap to Shannon limit (σ∗). In this paper, we use the Rician
channel and code rate R is given by

ρj

R=1−

jj λi

(9)

ii

In these cases, proposed cost function can be expressed as

∆σ = σ∗ − σ

(10)

V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The proposed schemes are evaluated by C++ and MATLAB, where 1296-bit LDPC code with the code rate is randomly generated. In this paper, we examine the data recovery performance on each step of the decoding process over Rician channel environment (Fig. 3). The code is applied with various degrees of error. The x-axis of the figure shows the number of iterations required during the decoding process. The y-axis shows the remaining bit errors in the code after each iteration.
The ability of the code in terms of error correction is observed for several Rician channl levels. In this simulation resuls, we can be verified that using the proposed scheme using PSO has better correction performance than others. Based on these results show that the proposed scheme can recover more bit errors than other schemes.

VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes the enhanced BP decoding scheme of Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes scheme using Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm. The proposed scheme of this paper describes the BP decoding scheme using PSO algorithm which can optimize the degree distribution pairs of check and variable node.
As future work, we are planning to investigate the performance using discrete fast density evolution (FDE) technique for developing robust systems.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Maurya, V. K. Jain, ”Energy-Efficient Network Protocol for Precision Agriculture: Using threshold sensitive sensors for optimal performance,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 6, pp. 42–51, 2017.
[2] R. G. Gallager, ”Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Cambridge MIT, June, 1963.
[3] A. Prasetiadi, D.-S. Kim, and S.-Y. Shin, ”Decoding scheme of error correction using fake error addition to compress data transmission,” In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), pp. 536–537, 2013.
[4] A. Prasetiadi and D.-S. Kim, ”Faulty node detection in distributed systems using bch code,”IEEE Communications Letters, vol 17, no 3, pp. 620–623, 2013.
[5] F. Kschischang and B. Frey, ”Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol 16, no 2, pp. 219–230, 1998.
[6] Reynolds, ”Flocks, birds, and schools: a distributed behavioral model,” In Computer Graphics, pp. 25–34, 1987.
[7] Z. Tu, Q. Wang, and Y. Shen, ”A distributed selfdeployment method for coverage optimization in mobile sensor network,” In 2011 6th International ICST Conference on Communications and Networking in China (CHINACOM), pp. 881–886, 2011.
[8] H. Zhang, J. Llorca, C. Davis, and S. Milner, ”atureinspired selforganization, control, and optimization in heterogeneous wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol 11, no 7, pp. 1207–122, 2012.

625
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:50:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

