2019 IEEE 8th Global Conference on Consumer Electronics (GCCE)

A Novel Data Packing Technique for QC-LDPC Decoder Architecture applied to NAND flash controller

Longyu Ma Department of Computer Science
The University of Auckland Auckland, New Zealand lma792@aucklanduni.ac.nz

Hong-fu Chou Department of Computer Science
The University of Auckland Auckland, New Zealand exhan100chou@gmail.com

Chiu-Wing Sham Department of Computer Science
The University of Auckland Auckland, New Zealand b.sham@auckland.ac.nz

Abstract—This paper presents a data packing technique for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes decoder applied to NAND flash controller which has the challenge of long code length implementation due to high complexity and routing congestion on floor planning. Firstly, we introduce a proposed shift network to reorder the channel data sequence. The data packing mechanism is designed to be generic. Secondly, the proposed LDPC architecture is desgined to overcome complicated routing problems caused by random accessing of massage passing within the LDPC decoder. Based on the proposed architecture, the hardware description has been synthesized on Design Compiler using a TSMC 0.18um model and an FPGA-based floor planning with the implementing result has also been provided. Synthesis results also show that the area and throughput of the proposed decoder has desirable performance for the application of NAND flash controller.
Index Terms—NAND flash, LDPC code, Solid State Disc
I. INTRODUCTION
The market demand for non-volatile NAND flash memory has been increasing for a long time, since applications independent on heavy hard disks started to grow rapidly decades ago. Flash memory [1] provides a low power solution for storage systems and it is worth mentioning that the small size and the light form factor are the essential properties for this type of storage. The basic flash commands are provided by a main central processing unit(CPU) to fetch data from the flash memory. The flash interface unit has mainly provided a reliable component for graphics and multimedia processors and have been applied to digital televisions, mobile applications etc. In order to support multimedia applications, flash controller units have been optimized for large block reading and writing, as presented in [2] which provides the minimization of the main CPU interaction and supports DMA [3] data exchange between flash memory and system DRAM memory. As discussed in [4], the DMA collaborate with the error control coding (ECC) block. However , the ECC engine, consuming a large percentage of hardware resource and dragging down the system performance, cannot be accepted unless some optimizations are done. Quasi-Cyclic (QC) LDPC code [5], [6] simplifies the hardware implementation and achieves a desirable decoding performance comparing to computer generated random codes,

since QC-LDPC code still has the random property within based matrix using cyclic shifted ordering to construct the code. Authors in [7]–[10] improves the implementation of LDPC decoder, but it is difficult to manage well in randomized LDPC messages in the passing network.
In this paper, we proposes a generic data packing technique and take advantage of the configurable datawidth and depth of embedded memory to provide flexible partial parallel architecture for solving the complexity of routing cost. Section II provides the proposed data packing technique followed by the proposed LDPC architecture and results in Section III. In Section IV, the Conclusion is presented.
II. THE PROPOSED DATA PACKING TECHNIQUE
The receiving messages are stored into LLR RAM and the sequence of messages needs to be reordered for the data packing technique. The reordering is related to the depth of RAM for each address which store a package of message. For example, the depth of RAM is l and each address in the RAM can have p/l massage in a bundle. We should note that l should be a factor of p. As a result, the block interleaver for the reordering is presented as π(i), where 0 <= i < N .
π(i) = (p/l) ∗ (i mod l) + (i/l) (3)
where the operation present the nearest integer less than i/l . In Fig. 1, we illustrate a simple case of p = 16 and l = 4. In Fig. 1 (A), the natural order of packing the messages into the memory. After interleaving the messages sequence, the messages can be packed into memory in Fig. 1 (B). The proposed data packing technique relies on the reordering data sequence to pack the messages to the identical address of BRAM and pop out while the message passing in order to ensure the messages are all sorted to the identical parity check node. In Fig. 2, the natural order messages pack into the example of memory which result in the mismatching messages of the address Addr0 to the identical check node, leading to redundant time of accessing the address Addr1. The proposed approach alleviates redundant waiting time and buffer the messages to registers which is the last storage place before

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:54:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

897

978-1-7281-3575-5/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

the CNP computation. As an example in Fig. 2, check node process can take the calculation to the bundle of messages after circular shifting. Since the message sequence is reordered according to the wordlength of BRAM, the randomized cyclic shifted property is unable to affect our proposed architecture which leads to more effective computation and less routing overhead.
Fig. 1. Example of a packing memory.

clock rate 320MHz, the throughput of this decoder can reach up to 633Mbps.
IV. CONCLUSION
The proposed innovation alleviates the complexity of LDPC random accessing messages passing by utilizing a simple block interleaver to reorder the messages sequence and circular shifter. Therefore, the routing congestion is solved to some extend during the place and route process. As this generic architecture only provides an insight of long QC-LDPC code for the application of storage system, higher parallel processing units can be implemented to increase the throughput without routing difficulty in the future.

Fig. 3. A computing schedule of the proposed architecture

Fig. 2. Example of a natural packing approach.
III. THE PROPOSED LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE AND THE SYNTHESIS RESULT
The proposed LDPC decoder takes an example of code length 10240 and (40,4) QC-LDPC code. The parity length is 1024 with code rate 0.9. We proposed a 5 groups of combining variable node process(VNP) and check node process(CNP) as a process unit for computing messages passing operation. Messages are stored into RAM and pop out to the corresponding VNP. For our generic proposed architecture, the CNP only needs to rely on simple circular shifter to match a bundle of messages on the corresponding party check ensemble. After CNP computing, the messages are selected for the minimum value.
In Fig. 3, a computing schedule of the proposed architecture is presented. Decoding a block of block RAM which store the messages of 8 Zi,j blocks is divided into 4 sections to access the message and compute CNP and VNP. The total amount of Zi,j blocks column is 40 which is N = 40. Two message bundles corresponding to 2 Zi,j blocks can be combined and process concurrently to access from each memory address as shown in Fig. 3. As a result, the wordlength of BSRAM is 96 bit (quantization is 3 bits). The CNP and VNP are sequentially processed in the method of paralleled processing 2 Zi,j blocks and inserting filp flops to re-time the shortest path along the combinational circuit. The proposed LDPC decoder architecture takes 636.74K gate counts using a TSMC 0.18um technology. The decoding latency is 6144 clock cycles. With a

REFERENCES
[1] Yoshio Nishi, Advances in Non-volatile Memory and Storage Technology, Electronic and Optical Materials: Woodhead Publishing, 2014.
[2] Yu Liu, Lixin Cheng and Xuguang Wang,“Commands scheduling optimized flash controller for high bandwidth SSD application,” Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology (ICSICT) IEEE 11th International Conference on, pp.1-3, 2012
[3] L. Rota, M. Caselle, S. Chilingaryan, A. Kopmann, M. Webe, “A PCIe DMA Architecture for Multi-Gigabyte Per Second Data Transmission,” Nuclear Science IEEE Transactions on, vol. 62, pp. 972-976, June 2015.
[4] Daesung Kim and Jeongseok Ha, “Serial quasi-primitive BC-BCH codes for NAND flash memories,” (ICC) 2016 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 1-6.
[5] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “ Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,”IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, Jul. 2007, pp. 2429V2458.
[6] Qing Lu, Chiu-Wing Sham and Francis C. M. Lau, “On using the cyclically-coupled QC-LDPC codes in future SSDs,” 2016 IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems (APCCAS), pp. 625-628, 2016.
[7] X. H. Chen, J. Y. Kang, S. Lin V. Akella, “Memory System Optimization for FPGA-Based Implementation of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Decoder,”IEEE Transactions on Circuit and System, vol. 58, Issue: 1, Jan. 2011, pp. 98-111.
[8] Hong-Fu Chou and Chiu-Wing Sham, “An Optimization Approach for an RLL-Constrained LDPC Coded Recording System Using Deliberate Flipping,”IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 22, Issue: 10, Oct. 2018, pp. 1976-1979.
[9] Qing Lu, J. Fan, Chiu-Wing Sham, W. M. Tam and Francis C. M. Lau, “A 3.0 Gb/s Throughput Hardware-Efficient Decoder for CyclicallyCoupled QC-LDPC Codes,”IEEE Transactions on Circuit and System I, vol. 63, Issue: 1, Jan. 2016, pp. 134-145.
[10] Longyu Ma and Chiu-Wing Sham, “Optimized Layer Architecture for Layered LDPC Code Decoder,” 2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC), Oct. 2018, pp. 287291.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:54:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
898

