6652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2019

On the Design of Multi-Edge Type Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Suhwang Jeong , Student Member, IEEE, and Jeongseok Ha , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Since multi-edge type low-density parity-check (MET-LDPC) codes were first proposed, the design of MET-LDPC codes has been extensively studied for various applications. However, the existing design rules assume that check node degrees are in the so-called concentrated form which enables one to conveniently find pairs of edge and node distributions satisfying the socket count equalities (SCEs). However, it in return makes the code design conducted in a limited search space, which may lead to a sub-optimal design. This paper proposes a novel design rule for MET-LDPC codes together with a scheme to efficiently sort out invalid distributions, i.e., ones not satisfying the SCEs, in the design process. The proposed design rule does not require check node degrees to be in the concentrated form and can find out optimized MET-LDPC codes without any restriction on the search space. Based on the proposed design rule, MET-LDPC codes are designed across a wide range of code rates on binary-erasure channel and binary-input additivewhite Gaussian channel. The designed codes are compared with ones reported in the open literature, which confirms that MET-LDPC codes with the proposed design rule have better threshold performances regardless of channel and code rate even with sets of limited code parameters.
Index Terms— Belief-propagation, density evolution, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, multi-edge type LDPC codes, optimization, differential evolution.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first introduced by Gallager in [11] and rediscovered by MacKay and Neal in [19] as a family of error-correcting codes with capacity-approaching performances over binary-input memoryless symmetric channels. Later in [27], Richardson et al. extensively investigated design of capacity-approaching LDPC code ensembles using the density evolution technique. The rediscovery of LDPC codes [19] ignited an explosion of interest and led to a few notable variants of LDPC codes such as concatenated tree (CT) codes [25], repeat-accumulate (RA) codes [8], accumulate-repeat-accumulate (ARA) codes [7].
Manuscript received October 15, 2018; revised April 4, 2019 and June 13, 2019; accepted June 30, 2019. Date of publication July 9, 2019; date of current version October 16, 2019. This research was supported by the MSIT (Ministry of Science and ICT), Korea, under the ITRC (Information Technology Research Center) support program (IITP-2019-2015-0-00385) supervised by the IITP (Institute for Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation), in part by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2018R1A2B6003474), and in part by BK21 Plus. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was L. Dolecek. (Corresponding author: Jeongseok Ha.)
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 305-701, South Korea (e-mail: marinetg1@kaist.ac.kr; jsha@kaist.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2019.2927567

In [29], Richardson and Urbanke proposed a new class of LDPC ensemble called multi-edge type (MET) LDPC codes as a unifying framework. The structure of MET-LDPC codes differentiates itself from that of standard LDPC codes in such a way that it contains diverse edge types between bipartite nodes, i.e. variable and check nodes, while there is only one type of edges in standard LDPC codes. Thus, in an ensemble of standard LDPC codes, one type of edges are randomly permuted whereas in an ensemble of MET-LDPC codes, edges of each type are permuted with an uniformly chosen interleaver. In standard LDPC codes, each node is characterized by its degree, i.e. the number of edges connected to the node. Meanwhile, in MET-LDPC codes, a node is characterized by a sequence of degrees each of which tells the number of connected edges of a certain type, and a specific sequence of degrees is called edge degree vector (EDV). Note that the sum of degrees in an EDV amounts to the degree in standard LDPC codes, and two nodes of the same degree may have different statistical behaviors if they are specified by different EDVs.
The structure of MET-LDPC codes is so generic that it includes standard LDPC codes and their variants, i.e. CT, RA, and ARA codes, as its special cases. It was highlighted in [29] that MET-LDPC codes outperform standard LDPC codes for short block. In particular, the structure of MET-LDPC codes enables one to design LDPC codes of high rates with low error-floors, which is especially important for some applications, e.g. storage devices [34], ultrareliable and low-latency communication (URLLC) of the fifth generation (5G) digital cellular networks [23] and satellite communications [1]. The structure of MET-LDPC codes is also useful for designing very low rate LDPC codes which may be required in the applications like deep space communication [7] and continuous variable quantum key distribution (CVQKD) [17], [21], [35]. Moreover, the performance superiority of MET-LDPC code is achievable even at a reduced complexity by allowing low degree nodes without compromising performance.
Since MET-LDPC codes were first proposed in [29], there have been a few efforts [3], [10], [22], [38], [39] to apply MET-LDPC codes to various applications. Azmi et al. [3] considered MET-LDPC codes for decode-and-forward in relay channels and proposed two design strategies for optimizing bilayer MET-LDPC codes. MET-LDPC codes are adopted for unequal error protecting (UEP) [22] and coded modulation systems [10], [38], [39]. Recently, studies on efficient MET-LDPC code design have also been carried out in [14], [15]. Note that the code design in [14], [15]

0090-6778 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JEONG AND HA: ON THE DESIGN OF MET-LDPCs

6653

and this work implies optimization of MET-LDPC code ensembles instead of specific MET-LDPC code realizations. Jayasooriya et al. in [15] proposed an MET-LDPC code design technique which expedites the design process by judiciously combining the time-consuming density evolution and simple Gaussian approximation. Later, an efficient optimization technique was developed in [14] where the optimization was accelerated by adaptively reducing the randomness in the differential evolution [5], [33] or limiting the search space in a search algorithm.
An ensemble of MET-LDPC code is described with either a pair of node-perspective multinomials or a Tanner graph in which nodes are specified by EDVs and fractions of the nodes with certain EDVs. The sets of EDVs and fractions of nodes for a Tanner graph are referred to as edge distribution and node distribution,1 respectively. It should be noted that some pairs of edge and node distributions do not lead to Tanner graphs. For a Tanner graph to be realized with a pair of distributions, the edge and node distributions must be determined in such a way that the ‘socket count equalities’ (SCEs) [29], i.e. the number of edges from variable nodes has to be the same as that from check nodes per each edge type, are satisfied. In this work, we will refer a pair of edge and node distributions fulfilling the SCEs to as a valid pair of distributions. In addition, the edge and node distributions in a valid pair are called valid edge and node distributions, respectively. It should also be noted that for an edge distribution, there may not exist a node distribution of which a valid pair of distributions can be composed. In such a case, the edge distribution is called invalid. It is also possible that multiple valid node distributions can be paired with an edge distribution, which results in multiple valid pairs with the same edge distribution. Similarly, if a node distribution does not have a valid edge distribution to be paired, the node distribution is called invalid.
The search for an optimized code ensemble must be performed across all valid pairs of distributions. However, it will be later shown that there is a slim chance for a pair of randomly generated edge and node distributions to be formed into a valid pair. Thus, an efficient way to find out valid pairs of distributions is indispensable in the search for the optimized code ensemble. However, unfortunately, there has been no systematic way to produce valid pairs of distributions. Thus, valid pairs of distributions should be obtained via a trialand-error or exhaustive search, which is often an intolerably time-consuming task. To turn around the technical obstacle, the previous work [3], [10], [14], [15], [22], [38], [39] in common introduced an assumption of concentrated check node degrees with a limited number of edge types, e.g. three types of edges in [22]. That is, it is assumed that EDVs for check nodes are constrained in such a way that degrees of each edge type are the same or a limited number of consecutive values. The constraint on check nodes reduces the search space, which on one hand expedites the code design process. On the other hand, the constraint makes the diversity of graph limited and
1Formal definitions for edge and node distributions will be introduced shortly.

thus may lead to a sub-optimal code design. In [14], [15], the constraint is rather relaxed in such a way that the check node degrees are made up of two sets of concentrated degrees. Thus, MET-LDPC code ensembles constructed with the design rule in [14], [15] are allowed to have a richer graph structure. However, it is witnessed in [29] that the check node degrees of good MET-LDPC code ensembles are not concentrated. Thus, it is highly conceivable that the assumption of concentrated check degrees may lead to sub-optimal MET-LDPC codes. Motivated by this, we propose a systematic way to form valid pairs of distributions. In particular, for a given edge distribution, we formulate a linear homogeneous system and show that positive solutions 2 of the linear system turn out to be valid node distributions which can be paired with the provided edge distribution. Thus, once an edge distribution is given, the proposed scheme efficiently finds out valid node distributions if they exist. The proposed scheme in turn enables us to devise an efficient MET-LDPC code design rule which jointly optimizes both edge and node distributions.
In the proposed design rule, the joint optimization is carried out in a nested manner. More specifically, the code optimization problem is broken into two sub-problems, i.e. optimizations for node and edge distributions which are conducted by the inner and outer optimizations, respectively. This work adopts, but is not limited to, a non-linear optimization algorithm called the differential evolution (DE) [5], [33] to realize both the inner and outer optimizations. Note that for an edge distribution, multiple pairs of distributions can be composed of different valid node distributions among which there exists an optimum node distribution in terms of a certain measure.3 The DE in the outer optimization generates candidate edge distributions and lets the inner optimization find out the optimum node distribution across all possible valid node distributions pertaining to each edge distribution. The collaboration between the inner and outer optimizations enables the outer optimization to pair each candidate edge distribution with the optimum node distribution found out in the inner optimization. The DE in the outer optimization repeatedly executes evolutions of the candidate edge distributions, which drives the evolution gradually toward the optimum combination of edge and node distributions, namely the optimum MET-LDPC code ensemble. It must be noted that the DE in the inner optimization has to search for the optimum choice across vast node distributions. Thus, the proposed scheme for efficiently finding valid node distributions plays a pivotal role in the joint optimization. By successfully overcoming the long standing practical challenge, i.e. no efficient way to find valid pairs of distributions, we can propose an efficient MET-LDPC code design rule which enables one to find good MET-LDPC code ensembles without any restriction.
To assess the performance improvements due to the proposed design rule, while the proposed design rule is applicable to any binary-input symmetric channels, we design
2When all variables in a non-zero solution are non-negative, the solution is called a positive solution.
3In this work, we evaluate an MET-LDPC ensemble in terms of threshold evaluated with the density evolution. A formal definition of the threshold will be given shortly.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2019

MET-LDPC codes on the binary erasure channel (BEC) and the binary-input additive white-Gaussian-noise (BIAWGN) channel over a wide range of code rates and evaluate the designed codes in terms of their threshold values using the density evolution technique. The designed codes are also compared with ones reported in open literature [14], [16], [29]. In the comparisons, noticeable performance improvements are consistently witnessed regardless of channel and code rate. In particular, the MET-LDPC codes from the proposed design rule have better threshold performances even with limited code parameters, i.e. a smaller number of edge types and/or smaller maximum degrees. In addition, we demonstrate that good MET-LDPC code ensembles can be designed at high code rates where MET-LDPC code designs have remained rather untouched.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide backgrounds which include the descriptions of MET-LDPC ensembles with multinomials and Tanner graphs. In addition, the density evolution and differential evolution are concisely summarized. In Section III, we will explain how to transform the SCEs and other constraints arisen from code parameters into a linear homogeneous system and find valid pairs of distributions with the solutions of the linear system. In Section IV, we introduce a joint optimization to design MET-LDPC ensembles and techniques to accelerate the design process. Performances of designed MET-LDPC codes are compared with ones from open literature in Section V. Finally, we conclude our work in Section VI.
II. BACKGROUNDS
This section provides a summary of the descriptions of MET-LDPC code ensemble with multinomials and Tanner graph in [29] and short introductions to the density evolution and differential evolution algorithms for a better understanding of the forthcoming sections.

A. MET-LDPC Codes

This sub-section summarizes the descriptions of

MET-LDPC ensembles with multinomials and Tanner graphs

which were originally introduced in [29]. An MET-LDPC

code ensemble is specified with a pair of node-perspective

multinomials as follows:

ν(r, x)

nv
νirbi xdi ,

μ(x)

i=1 nc
μixgi ,

i=1

where ν(r, x) and μ(x) are related to the variable and check

nodes, respectively, rbi

nτ j=0

rbi,j
j

,

xdi

:=

ne j=1

xdi,j
j

,

xgi

ne j=1

xgi,j
j

,

rj

and

xj

are

indeterminants,

ne,

nτ ,

nv

and nc are positive integers, and νi and μi are positive reals.

The vector di [di,1 di,2 · · · di,ne ]T is an EDV for variable nodes where ne is the number of edge types, and di,j ∈ Z+

is the number of edges of type j connected to a variable node

with di. Similarly, gi and gi,j ∈ Z+ are defined for check

nodes. In addition to EDVs, variable nodes are characterized

by the channels whose outputs the variable nodes observe.

Assuming that there are nτ different physical channel types, a binary channel vector called received degree vector (RDV), bi [bi,0 bi,1 · · · bi,nτ ]T for 1 ≤ i ≤ nv, manifests from which channel the variables nodes with di take outputs. That is, the value ‘1’ for bi,j indicates that the variable nodes with an EDV of di have outputs from the channel of type j ≥ 0, and the value of bi,0 tells whether the variable nodes are punctured or not. Since variable nodes with an EDV have outputs from only one channel type, vectors b will have the
value ‘1’ at only one entry and zeros for the other entries. Note that all the variable nodes with (bi, di) have the same statistical properties and are called variable nodes of class i. Similarly, the check nodes with gi are called check nodes of class i. Then, the coefficients νi and μi are fractions of variable and check nodes of class i, respectively. For given
sets of EDVs, edge distributions for variable and check nodes are defined in Definition 1.
Definition 1: (Edge distributions for variable and check nodes, Ev and Ec): The edge distributions for variable and check nodes are defined as matrices with columns made up
of EDVs for variable and check nodes, respectively. That is, the edge distributions for variable and check nodes are
respectively given by

Ev ⎡d1 d2 · · ·

d1,1 d2,1

=

⎢⎣⎢⎢

d1,2 ...

d2,2 ...

d1,ne d2,ne

Ec ⎡g1 g2 · · ·

g1,1 g2,1

=

⎢⎢⎣⎢

g1,2 ...

g2,2 ...

g1,ne g2,ne

dnv

⎤

··· ··· ...

dnv ,1
dnv ,2 ...

⎥⎥⎦⎥

,

· · · dnv,ne

gnc

⎤

· · · gnc,1

··· ...

gnc,2 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎦

.

· · · gnc,ne

A pair of edge distributions, Ev and Ec, are collectively called an edge distribution and denoted by E [Ev Ec] which is a matrix of size ne×(nv+nc) and contains Ev and Ec as its submatrices. Meanwhile, for given fractions of variable and check
node classes, node distributions are defined in Definition 2. Definition 2: (node distributions for variable and check
nodes, ν and μ): The node distributions for variable and check nodes are defined as vectors with the fractions of variable and check nodes, respectively. That is,

ν

ν1 ν2 · · · νnv T ,

μ μ1 μ2 · · · μnc T .

Similarly, a pair of node distributions is simply referred to as a node distribution denoted by ζ [νT μT ]T which is a vector of length (nv + nc).
An MET-LDPC code ensemble is specified with an edge
and node distributions, and an MET-LDPC code design seeks for an optimum combination of the distributions, i.e. E and ζ. The edge and node distributions are interrelated each other, and
thus for a multinomial representation to be valid, the fractions

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JEONG AND HA: ON THE DESIGN OF MET-LDPCs

6655

Fig. 1. A Tanner graph representation of an MET-LDPC code ensemble.

of variable and check node classes, i.e. νi and μi, must be determined to satisfy the following three constraints.
• Socket Count Equality (SCE) Constraint:

νxj (1, 1) = μxj (1)

where 1 ≤ j ≤ ne, 1 is a vector of all 1’s, the length is determined by context, and

νxj (r, x)

∂ ∂xj

ν(r, x)

and

μxj (x)

∂ μ(x). ∂xj

• Received Constraint:

νrj (1, 1) = πj
where 1 ≤ j ≤ nτ , πj is the fraction of transmitted bits over channel type j, j πj = 1, and νr0(1, 1) is the fraction of punctured bits and can be freely determined. • Code Rate Constraint:

R = ν(1, 1) − μ(1),

where R is a code rate.
A multinomial description for an MET-LDPC code ensemble can also be represented with a Tanner graph. In Example 1, a multinomial representation of MET-LDPC code ensemble is presented, and the corresponding Tanner graph is depicted in Fig. 1. To see whether the pair of distributions are valid, the three conditions are also tested in Example 1.
Example 1: An MET-LDPC code ensemble of rate R = 0.5 is specified by a pair of multinomials:
ν(r, x) = 0.5 r1x12x21 + 0.5 r1x11x21, μ(y) = 0.0833 x18 x22 + 0.4167 x21 x22,
where there are two variable node classes, two check node classes with two edge types, i.e. nv = 2, nc = 2, ne = 2, respectively. It is easily confirmed that the SCEs are satisfied, i.e. νx1 (1, 1) = μx1 (1) = 1.5 and νx2 (1, 1) = μx1 (1) = 1. In addition, the received constraint and code rate constraint are shown to be satisfied as j νrj (1, 1) = 1 and ν(1, 1) − μ(1) = 0.5, respectively. Since all the tests are passed, the pair of edge and node distributions are valid and thus can be expressed with a Tanner graph as shown in Fig. 1.

B. Density Evolution
The density evolution is a numerical tool which tracks the evolutions of probability densities (densities for short, hereafter) for the messages between variable and check nodes

within a message-passing decoding with assumptions that the block length tends to infinity and the channel is symmetric.
If both the channel and the decoder fulfill the symmetry conditions in [28], the error rate during the iterative decoding

becomes independent of transmitted codeword. Thus, this work simply assumes that the all-zero codeword is transmitted. The message can be represented in various forms and

without loss of generality, this work assumes that messages
are expressed in the form of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). The
message from the channel for variable nodes of class i, denoted by ui, is defined as ui ln(Pr(yi|ci = 0)/ Pr(yi|ci = 1)), where yi and ci are an output and input for the channel, respectively. Let vi( )(e) denote a variable-to-check message along the e-th edge type from the i-th variable node class at the -th

iteration. Similarly, we denote the check-to-variable message

along the e-th edge type from the i-th check node class at the

-th iteration as ui( )(e). The densities for the variable-to-check and the check-to-variable messages are denoted by f (vi( )(e))
Æ and f (ui( )(e)), respectively, and they are updated by the rules:

f (vi( )(e)) = f (ui; θ)

Æ f (u( −1)(e)) (di,e−1)

ne

f (u( −1)(j))

di,j
,

j=1,j=e
f (ui( )(e)) = f (v( )(e)) (gi,e−1)

ne

f (v( )(j))

gi,j
,

j=1,j=e

for e = 1, 2, . . . , ne, where and denote the convolution and the ‘tanh rule’ [28], [30], respectively, f (ui; θ) is the density of the channel outputs for variable nodes of class
i, and the channel is degraded with the growing channel parameter, θ ∈ R, e.g. crossover probability for binarysymmetric channel. For an edge type, say e, the density, f (v( )(e)) is obtained by performing the average over densities
of the edge type in different classes, which is expressed as

nv
νkdk,ef (vk( )(e))

f (v( )(e)) = k=1 nv

,

νk dk,e

k=1

nc
μkgk,ef (uk( )(e))

f (u( )(e)) = k=1 nc

,

μk gk,e

k=1

respectively. More details can be found in [30]. For a symmetric channel, the threshold of an ensemble is
defined in Definition 3. Definition 3 (Threshold): The threshold of an ensemble
is defined as the largest channel parameter denoted by θ∗(ν(r, x), μ(x)) such that the a posteriori probability of each variable node class tends to the delta function at infinity with the growing number of iterations (equivalently, the probability

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2019

of error tends to zero), i.e. θ∗(ν(r, x), μ(x)) = max θ

subject to

⎧ ⎨

lim
→∞

⎩f

(ui;

θ)

⎛
ne
⎝

Æ f (u( )(e))

⎞⎫

di,j

⎬ ⎠
⎭

=

δ∞,

j=1

for each variable node class i since we assume that the all-zero codeword is transmitted.
The threshold of an MET-LDPC code ensemble can be efficiently predicted with the density evolution. For BI-AWGN channels and BECs, this work takes noise standard deviation and erasure probability denoted by σ and , respectively, as channel parameters. The MET-LDPC code design can be stated in such a way that for a given code rate, the threshold is the target function to be maximized over all possible valid pairs of distributions.

C. Differential Evolution
The DE is a nature-inspired non-linear optimization technique with unique advantages such as simplicity to implement, better performance, a small number of control parameters, and a lower space complexity [5]. In particular, there are only three main control parameters, i.e. crossover coefficient Cr, mutation coefficient F and the population size NP , and their contributions to the performance of the DE have been well studied. Due to the unparalleled advantages, the DE has been widely adopted across various areas as an efficient non-linear optimization technique. In particular, it was demonstrated that the DE is especially useful to design good standard LDPC and MET-LDPC code ensembles in [31] and [14], respectively. Thus, this work also utilizes the DE for designing MET-LDPC code ensembles, and concisely summarizes the DE algorithm and related notations in this subsection based on the work in [5].
Suppose that a system is governed by a set of system parameters represented by a vector z = [z1 z2 · · · zD]T ∈ Ω ⊆ RD where zi ∈ R for 1 ≤ i ≤ D, and the system performance is measured in terms of a target function T (z). The set Ω is defined as a collection of all valid parameter vectors. In the proposed MET-LDPC code design, Ω consists of valid pairs of edge and node distributions. Then, the DE searches in an iterative fashion for a parameter vector z∗ at which the target function T (z) is maximized, i.e. T (z∗) ≥ T (z) for all z = z∗. Note that the target function is θ∗(ν(r, x), μ(x)) in the proposed code design. The DE is comprised of four basic steps: 1) initialization of parameter vectors, 2) mutation with difference vectors, 3) crossover, and 4) selection. The steps between 2) and 4) are iteratively performed until the maximum number of iterations is reached or the DE finds out a parameter vector at which the target function value becomes larger than a pre-specified value. Details of the basic four steps are summarized as follows.
1) Initialization of Parameter Vectors: A collection of NP parameter vectors called population is initialized with randomly generated parameter vectors each of which is

a candidate solution and will be called a member of the population. That is, a population consists of zi,G = [z1,i,G z2,i,G · · · zD,i,G]T where G is the iteration counter and set to zero in the initialization, and i = 1, 2, . . . , NP . The
random generation of the members in the initial population
may be performed over a range with an upper and lower bounds, zmax = [z1,max z2,max . . . zD,max]T and zmin = [z1,min z2,min . . . zD,min]T , respectively. That is, the j-th component of the i-th member in the initial populations may be
determined as

zj,i,0 = zj,min + randi,j [0, 1] · (zj,max − zj,min),

where randi,j [0, 1] is a uniformly distributed random number between 0 and 1.
2) Mutation With Difference Vectors: The mutation aims at randomly perturbing the members in the population. At every iteration G, the mutation is performed by combining target vectors which are members in the current population and produces a donor vector. Though there exist diverse mutation strategies, this work introduces two of them as follows: DE/best/1: At iteration G, a donor vector wid,nG is given by
wid,nG = zbest,G + F · (zr1i ,G − zr2i ,G)
where i = 1, 2, . . . , NP , zbest,G is the member with the maximum target function, i.e. the one with the ‘best’ target function, r1i and r2i are randomly chosen integers from {1, 2, . . . , NP } and r1i = r2i , and F ∈ (0, 1] is a mutation coefficient. In this strategy, the best member zbest,G is mutated by the difference of two randomly selected members, i.e. (zr1i ,G − zr2i ,G). DE/target-to-best/1: In this strategy, the donor vector is obtained in a more involved way as follows:

wid,nG = zi,G + F · (zbest,G − zi,G) + F · (zr1i ,G − zr2i ,G),
where the difference mutates the recombinant of two vectors, i.e. zi,G + F · (zbest,G − zi,G).
3) Crossover: For the purpose of enhancing the potential
diversity of the population, the crossover operation mixes components of target vector zi,G and donor vector wid,nG, which outcomes a new vector called trial vector denoted by wit,rG = [w1tr,i,G w2tr,i,G · · · wDtr,i,G]T . There are a few crossover strategies among which the binomial crossover operation produces a trial vector wit,rG as follows:

wjt,ri,G =

wjd,ni,G, if (randi,j [0, 1] ≤ Crorj = jrand), zj,i,G, otherwise,

for 1 ≤ j ≤ D, where Cr ∈ (0, 1) is a crossover coefficient, and jrand ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D} is a randomly chosen index.
4) Selection: The crossover operation produces NP trial
vectors. Then, the selection operation compares each of the trial vectors, wit,rG, with the corresponding target vector, zi,G and selects the better one as the new member in the updated
population, zi,G+1. That is,

zi,G+1 =

wit,rG, if T (wit,rG) ≥ T (zi,G), zi,G, otherwise.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JEONG AND HA: ON THE DESIGN OF MET-LDPCs

6657

The selection operation makes the population evolved into a better set of members. By iterating steps between 2) and 4), the DE obtains a maximum of the target function with zbest,Gmax where Gmax is the maximum number of iterations.
III. SPACE OF THE VALID NODE DISTRIBUTIONS
As aforementioned, it is crucial to efficiently produce valid pairs of distributions for performing the code optimization. In this section, we formulate a given edge distribution and constraints discussed in Section II-A into a linear homogeneous system and show that positive solutions of the system become valid node distributions. First, we explain how to find positive solutions of a linear homogeneous system in an efficient way, which is followed by the formulation of a homogeneous system when a given edge distribution and constraints are provided. Finally, we define the space of valid node distributions over which the inner DE in the proposed code design finds out the optimum node distribution.

A. A Positive Solution for a Linear Homogeneous System
In this sub-section, we review the method introduced in [6] which efficiently provides positive solutions for a linear homogeneous system. First, we consider systems with a single equation, which will be generalized to systems with m equations.
1) A Positive Solution for a Single Equation: For unknown variables x1, . . . , xn, we consider a linear homogeneous system with a single equation:

a1x1 + a2x2 + · · · + anxn = 0,

(1)

where ai ∈ R. The subscripts of the coefficient, aj’s, are partitioned into two index sets, P {j|aj > 0} and N = {j|aj < 0}. Then, the equation in (1) can be expressed
as

aixi = − aj xj ,

i∈P

j∈N

where a positive solution is given by

xi =

− j∈N aj for i ∈ P, j∈P aj for i ∈ N .

(2)

If both P and N are non-empty, there exists at least one positive solution as shown in (2). However, if one of the sets is empty, there does not exist a positive solution except for all zero solution.
2) A Positive Solution for m Equations: now, we consider a linear homogeneous system with m equations which are expressed as

n

arixi = 0,

(3)

i=1

where ari is the coefficient of xi for r = 1, 2, . . . , m. Then, it will be shown that the system can be converted to a linear homogeneous system with m − 1 equations. First, the index sets P and N are constructed with respect to the first equation

in (3). That is, P {j|a1,j > 0} and N = {j|a1,j < 0} with which we can rewrite the first equation in (3) as

a1ixi = − a1j xj .

(4)

i∈P

j∈N

In accordance with the index sets, the remaining m − 1

equations can also be expressed as

a ixi = − a j xj ,

(5)

i∈P

j∈N

where 2 ≤ ≤ m. By multiplying the left side of (5) by the right side of (4) and vice versa, we get the following m − 1 equations:

a1ixi a j xj = a1j xj a ixi, for2 ≤

i∈P

j∈N

j∈N

i∈P

≤ m, (6)

which are turned into a linear homogeneous system with m−1 equations as follows:

(a1ia j − a1ja i)xixj = 0, for2 ≤ ≤ m. (7)
i∈P ,j ∈N
where xixj’s are now variables. By introducing new symbols r ,ij = a1ia j − a1ja i and xij = xixj, the system in (7) is expressed in a neat form:

r ,ijxij = 0 for 2 ≤ ≤ m.

(8)

i∈P ,j ∈N

Theorem 1 (Dines, [6]): To every positive solution of the
system (3), there exists a corresponding positive solution of
the system in (8), and the converse is also true. Proof: For a positive solution x1∗, x2∗, . . . , x∗n of the system (3), the positive solution of the corresponding system in (8) is simply xi∗j = xi∗x∗j , since xi∗j ’s satisfy all the equations in (8). Conversely, we claim that if x∗11, x∗12 . . . , x∗|P||N | is a positive solution of the system in (8), a positive solution for the system
in (3) is obtained from

x∗i =

− j∈N a1j xi∗j for i ∈ P, j∈P a1j xj∗i for i ∈ N .

(9)

For x∗i ’s in (9) to be a solution of the system in (3), the equalities both in (4) and (5) must hold. It is straightfoward to

confirm that the equality in (4) holds by simply replacing xi’s in (4) with xi∗’s in (9), which makes the equalities in (6) equivalent to the ones in (5). Thus, we can finally confirm

that the equalities in (5) hold by replacing xi’s in (6) with xi∗’s in (9).
Theorem 1 implies that any linear homogeneous system

with m variables can be eventually reduced to a system with

a single equation whose solution is obtained as shown in (2).

Then, a solution for the system with m variable is found by

recursively applying the relation in (9) from the one for the

system with a single equation. If there does not exist a positive

solution for the system with a single variable, so does not for

the system with m variables. In the next subsection, we discuss

how to formulate the constraints in Section II-A and other

code parameters into a linear homogeneous system with node

distributions as variables and also propose an algorithm which

provides a set of positive solutions, i.e. node distributions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2019

B. Finding Valid Node Distributions
This section proposes a scheme which finds valid node distributions for edge distributions. Suppose that an edge distribution E = [Ev Ec] and a node distribution ζ = [νT μT ]T are given. Then, the SCE’s in Section II-A can be expressed as

Evν = Ecμ,

which is nothing but a linear homogeneous system:

Ev −Ec

ν μ

= 0ne ,

(10)

where 0ne is an all zero vector of length ne. Meanwhile, we modify the code rate constraint,

nv

nc

R = ν(1, 1) − μ(1) = νi − μi.

i

i

to

nv

nv

nc

R · νi · (1 − bi,0) = νi − μi,

i

i

i

which is possible due to the received constraint, namely

nv

nv

νi · (1 − bi,0) = πi = 1.

i

i

Then, it is clear that the rate and received constraints are formulated into a linear homogeneous system with variables ν and μ:

nv

nc

νi · (1 − R · (1 − bi,0)) − μi = 0,

i

i

which can also be expressed in a matrix form as follows:

(1 − R) · 1Tnv + R · b˜0T −1nTc

ν μ

= 0,

(11)

where b˜T0 = b1,0 b2,0 · · · bnv,0 , and 1nv and 1nc are all one vectors of lengths nv and nc, respectively. If an MET-LDPC code ensemble does not have punctured variable nodes, the lin-
ear system in (11) simply becomes

(1 − R) · 1Tnv −1Tnc

ν μ

= 0,

since bi,0 = 0 for all i. Finally, the two linear homogeneous systems in (10) and (11) are combined into a single linear homogeneous system as follows:

A

ν μ

= 0ne+1,

(12)

where

A=

Ev

−Ec

(1 − R) · 1Tnv + R · b˜0T −1nTc

.

(13)

For an edge distribution, E = [Ev Ec], the linear homogeneous system in (12) has either no positive solution or at least one solution. As introduced in Section III-A, the system in (12) can be reduced to a system with a single equation. If the one with a single equation has its solution, then

the system in (12) also has solutions, which implies that the provided edge distribution has valid node distributions. Now, we will propose an algorithm described in Algorithm 1 which conveniently tests whether an edge distribution, E has valid node distributions or not. In addition, when the edge distribution is revealed to have valid node distributions by the test, the algorithm allows one to efficiently produce the valid node distributions pertaining to the edge distribution.
Details of the proposed algorithm are as follows. Algorithm 1 starts with an assumption that edge distributions for variable and check nodes, Ev and Ec, are provided along with code parameters such as a code rate, R and an RDV, b. Then, in Step 2 it constructs the matrix A in (13) and subsequently in Step 3 finds the rank of A denoted by rA which tells the number of independent equations in A. Note that the left arrow indicates an assignment operation that puts the operand on the right-hand side to the variable on the left-hand side. In the while loop between Steps 5 and 10, the Gaussian elimination and row reduction operations are repeatedly fulfilled until it reaches a system with a single equation, i.e. A(1). During the reduction process, the ranks of the reduced systems are, i.e. ranks of R(k) for 2 ≤ k ≤ rA, stored in the set, K. Note that Γ(k ) and A(k ) for 1 ≤ k ≤ rA − 1 are the same up to elementary row operations, and thereby they have the same solutions. In Step 12, the algorithm tests whether the system with A(1) has a solution or not. If a solution does not exist, neither does the system with A. Thus, the algorithm returns p of zero as an indicator for ‘no positive solution’ and stops in Step 13. Otherwise, it computes solutions for the reduced systems in a recursive fashion starting from the one with A(1) based on the relation in (9), and the recursion finishes with the solution for A(rA) denoted by x(rA) in Step 20. In Step 21, the algorithm finds a basis for the null space of A with which p independent positive solutions for A denoted by xi’s are obtained in Step 22 where p is the dimension of the null space. Note that the way to combine ai and x ensures that xi’s are independent positive solutions.
Remark 1: Algorithm 1 is especially useful in two aspects: 1) Algorithm 1 enables one to conveniently decide whether an edge distribution has positive solutions or not. Considering that randomly generated pairs of edge distributions for variable and check node have valid node distributions with a low probability, the feature is especially useful in code optimization. 2) The algorithm provides p positive solutions with which other positive solutions can be efficiently generated as linear combinations of the positive solutions from Algorithm 1. In the DE for the inner optimization, a population must be initialized with a pool of positive solutions, i.e. valid node distributions, which can be efficiently conducted with Algorithm 1. The advantages of Algorithm 1 will be discussed more in Section IV.
Example 2: This example explains how Algorithm 1 works for the edge distribution in Example 1.
IV. JOINT OPTIMIZATION SCHEME USING DIFFERENTIAL EVOLUTION
In this section, we introduce the proposed design rule for MET-LDPC code ensembles. First, we formulate the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JEONG AND HA: ON THE DESIGN OF MET-LDPCs

6659

Algorithm 1 Find Node Distributions for a Pair of Edge

Distributions

Input: Code rate, R, a pair of edge distributions, Ev and Ec, and bi for i = 1, 2, . . . , nv;
Output: If there exist positive solutions, p independent positive solutions x1, . . . , xp of Axi = 0Tne+1 will be returned where A is constructed as shown in (13), and p is the

dimension of null space for A. Otherwise, p of zero will

be returned indicating ‘no positive solution’;

1: Initialize an index set K as an empty set;

2: Construct A as shown in (13);

3: rA ← rank(A); k ← rank(A);
4: Perform the Gaussian elimination for A and delete all-zero rows, which results in a matrix A(k) with k rows and

(nv + nc) columns; 5: while k > 1 do

6: K ← K ∪ {k}; 7: Reduce the number of equations in the system with A(k)

by one as shown in 8 and denote the system matrix of the reduced system by Γ(k ) where k is rank(Γ(k )); 8: Express Γ(k ) in a compact form, A(k ) by performing the Gaussian elimination for Γ(k ) and deleting all-

zero rows;

9: k ← k

10: end while 11: Find the solution of the system with A(1), denoted by x(1),

as shown in 2; 12: if the solution, x(1), does not exist then

13: return p = 0 and stop;

14: end if

15: while k < rA do 16: k ← κ ∈ K where κ is the smallest one in K but larger

than k. 17: Calculate the positive solution of the system with A(k ),
denoted by x(k ), from the one for A(k) following the

relation in 9;

18: k ← k ;

19: end while

20: x ← x(rA) where x = [x1 x2 · · · x(nv+nc)]T ;

21: Find a basis of the null space of A and denote basis vectors

by a1, a2, . . . , ap where ai = [ai,1 ai,2 · · · ai,(nv+nc)]T

and p is the dimension of the null space;

22: xi

←

ai +

x |amin|
xmin

for

1

≤

i

≤

p

where

amin

is

the

minimum element across a1, a2, . . . , ap, i.e. amin =

mini,j ai,j and xmin is the minimum element of x;

23: Return p and the independent positive solutions ζi =

Δi−1xi for i = 1, 2, . . . , p, where Δi =

nv j=1

(1

−

b0,j)xi,j and stop;

optimization problem, which is followed by discussions of the inner and outer optimizations.
A. Problem Statement The code optimization in this work finds out an ensemble
with a maximum threshold among a pool of ensembles.

Input: R = 0.5, Ev =

21 11

and Ec =

82 22

, and b1 =

b2 = [0 1];

1: K ← ⎡∅;

⎤

2 1 −8 −2

2: A = ⎣ 1 1 −2 −2⎦ ,

0.5 0.5 −1 −1

3: rA ← 2; k ← 2;

4: A(2) =

1 0 −6 0 0 1 4 −2

.

rank(A) = 2

6: K ← {2};

7: Γ(1) = 4 6 −12 ; and k ← 1;

rank of Γ(k ) is 1

8: A(1) = 1 1.5 −3 ;

9: k ← k ; 11: x(1) = 3 3 2.5 T ;

∃ a solution for A(1)x(1) = 0

16: k ← 2; 17: x(2) = 18 18 3 15 T ;

2 is min K but larger than k

18: k ← 2;

k =2

20: x ← x(2);

21: a1 = 6 −4 1 0 , a2 = 2 0 0 1 ;

p=2

22: 22:

ζ1 ζ2

= =

1 1416 146

78 68 13 60 , 72 74 12 61 ;

amin = −4, xmin = 12 Δ1 = Δ2 = 146

23: Return p = 2 and xi for i = 1, 2;

The code optimization is specifically described as

[ν∗(r, x), μ∗(x)] = arg max θ∗(ν(r, x), μ(x)), (14)
ν(r,x),μ(x)
subject to the constraints in Section II-A and maximum degree constraints,

di,j ≤ dmax,
j

gi,j ≤ gmax.
j

Since a pair of multinomials, namely ν(r, x) and μ(x), are equivalently described with a combination of edge distribution, E, and node distribution, ζ, the maximization in (14) can be expressed in terms of the edge and node distributions as

[E∗, ζ∗] = arg max θ∗(E, ζ).

(15)

E,ζ

The optimization is carried out in a nested manner. That is, the outer optimization searches for an optimized edge distribution, E, which is assisted with the inner optimization in charge of finding out an optimized node distribution, ζ∗E, corresponding to each edge distribution, E, considered in the outer optimization. It should be noted that the order of nesting, i.e. the outer and inner optimizations for edge and node distributions, is carefully introduced and cannot be reversed since it is an NP hard problem [20] to find the system matrix A matrix in (12) for a given node distribution ζ. That is, if the nesting is reversed, and a node distribution is given to the inner optimization, it is hard for the inner optimization to find out an optimized edge distribution for the given node distribution.
In Section IV-B, the inner optimization will be discussed which is followed by the description of the outer optimization in Section IV-C.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2019

Fig. 3. Optimization for edge distribution.

Fig. 2. Optimization for node distribution.

B. Optimization for Node Distributions

This subsection introduces the inner optimization which is

based on Algorithm 1 and the DE. The inner optimization

illustrated in Fig. 2 takes an edge distribution, E = [Ev Ec] together with code parameters, R and b, as its inputs. Then,

Algorithm 1 produces p pairs of node distributions associ-

ated with the edge distribution and code parameters. If the

combination of edge distribution and code rate does not have

a valid pair of distributions, i.e no positive solution from

Algorithm 1, the optimization terminates with an indication,

p = 0. In the case that there is only one positive solution,

p = 1, Algorithm 1 returns the positive solution as a valid

node

distribution, i.e.

ζ

∗ E

=

ζ1.

Meanwhile,

if

there

are

multiple positive solutions, p > 1, it generates a pool of

node distributions and initiates the DE which finds out the

optimized

node

distributions,

ζ

∗ E

as

the

output

from

the

inner

optimization.

The pool of node distributions is made of linear com-

binations of the p independent vectors ζ1, ζ2, . . . , ζp from Algorithm 1. That is

ζ = z1ζ1 + z2ζ2 + · · · + zp−1ζp−1 + zpζp
p
= ziζi
i=1

where ζ is a member of the initial population in the DE,

and zp = (1 − z1 − z2 − · · · − zp−1) is chosen to satisfy

the received constraint, i.e.

nv i

ζi

·

(1

−

bi,0)

=

1.

Then,

the target function depends on the choice of z1, z2, · · · zp−1,

and the target function in (15) is maximized over all possible choices of z for the give edge distribution, E. Therefore, the maximization in (15) can be equivalently expressed as

z∗ = arg max θ∗(E, z),
z
where z∗ = [z1∗ z2∗ · · · zp∗]. Note that certain z vectors may result in node distributions with negative elements, i.e. ζi < 0 for some i, which can also happen in the mutation process. In the initialization, we exclude such z vectors in making the
population. Meanwhile, in the mutation process, we avoid the
anomalies by assigning negative infinity to the target function.
Considering that we perform maximization, the association of negative infinity with target function makes such z vectors
excluded from the population. The DE finds out the optimal z denoted by z∗, and the inner optimization returns the valid node distribution corresponding to z∗ which is given by

ζ∗E =

ν

∗ E

μ∗E

p
= zi∗ζi.
i=1

(16)

The output from the inner optimization is delivered to the outer optimization which will be discussed in the next subsection.

C. Optimization for Edge Distributions

The outer optimization finds out the optimum edge distribution among candidate edge distributions each of which is paired with the optimum node distribution given by the inner optimization. The pair of the optimum node and edge distributions turns out to be the design goal, i.e. the optimum code ensemble. For the outer optimization, the maximization in (15) can be expressed as

E∗ = arg max θ∗(E, ζE∗ ),
E

where

ζ

∗ E

is

the

output

from

the

inner

optimization

for

the

edge distribution, E, namely the one in (16). The design

process interacting between the inner and outer optimizations

is illustrated in Fig. 3 where the mutation and crossover

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JEONG AND HA: ON THE DESIGN OF MET-LDPCs

6661

Fig. 5. Average times for algorithm 1 and a random search to find out valid node distribution for a given edge distribution.

Fig. 4. Up: Fractions of valid edge distributions among randomly generated edge distributions at code rates from 0.1 to 0.9, Down: Fractions of valid edge distributions among trial vectors with different mutation strategies at code rate 0.5.

processes

take

optimum

node

distributions,

ζ

∗ E

’s

from

the

inner optimization. If the inner optimization notifies the outer

one of no positive solution, the corresponding edge distri-

butions will be excluded from the population by assigning

negative infinity to their target functions.

Note that edge distributions are randomly generated to fill

the initial population of DE for the outer optimization. Then,

the majority of randomly generated distributions are invalid.

That is, most of the distributions do not have correspond-

ing node distributions which satisfy the SCEs. For example,

we randomly generate edge distributions at code rates from

0.1 to 0.9 and depict the fractions of valid edge distributions

in Fig. 4. Then, it is noticed that the fractions are between

one and two percent when the code rate is less than 0.5.

However, it becomes even less than one percent when the code

rate is larger than 0.5, and the DE may be stalled if the

invalid edge distributions are not sorted out. Meanwhile, in the

proposed design rule, Algorithm 1 enables the DE in the outer

optimization to efficiently sift out the invalid ones from the

initial population. Thus, the code optimization can start only

with the valid edge distributions, which greatly accelerates the

design process.

It should also be mentioned that the trial vectors in the

mutation process may not be valid edge distributions and a

careful selection of mutation strategy is also helpful to avoid

such invalid ones. In Fig. 4, we also depict the fractions of

valid edge distributions among the trial vectors generated in

the mutation process when different mutation strategies are

employed. The results in Fig. 4 show that the strategy labeled

as DE/target-to-best/1 has more valid edge distributions as

compared to the others, and thus we adopt the DE/target-to-

best/1 strategy in the code design. Algorithm 1 can also be

utilized to sort out the invalid edge distributions out of the

trial vectors generated in the mutation process.

Meanwhile, the inner optimization finds out an optimized

node distribution which requires an efficient way to generate

valid node distributions for a given edge distribution by the outer optimization. Existing design approaches randomly generate node distributions until valid node distributions are obtained. However, the random search does not know whether the given edge distribution is invalid, i.e. there does not exist a valid node distribution, or not. Thus, the random search must be performed until an enough number of node distributions are tested. If the maximum number of random trials is not set large enough, it may miss a valid node distribution and declares ‘no valid node distribution’. Meanwhile, Algorithm 1 in the proposed design rule simply produces valid node distributions if there exist. Otherwise, Algorithm 1 indicates that the given edge distribution is invalid, which drastically speeds up the design process. To quantify the efficiency of Algorithm 1, we implement both Algorithm 1 and a random search in MATLAB and measure the average times for Algorithm 1 and the random search to find out a valid node distribution, which is performed with code parameters, ne = 4, nv = 3 and nc = 3 over a wide range of code rates, i.e. 0.1 and 0.9. In Fig. 5, it is observed that the average time for random search is about 100 times slower than that of Algorithm 1 when the probability for the random search to miss a valid node distribution is set to 1 percent. Considering that the DE requires a large pool of edge and node distribution pairs, the random search must be extremely inefficient.
D. Some Techniques of Reducing the Search Range
The nature of DE adopted in both the inner and outer optimizations needs a great deal of edge and node distributions to make the initial populations and proceed with the mutation process. To accelerate the code optimization, it is especially important to block invalid distributions from being involved in the populations and mutation process, which is efficiently carried out with Algorithm 1. This subsection introduces some useful tips to further speed up the code design process.
1) Optimization for Edge Distributions: In good MET-LDPC code ensembles of low code rates, it is usually observed [2] that there exists a variable node class of degree one which will be called variable node class one without loss of generality. In addition, edges from the class one variable nodes are also designated by edge of type one, i.e.
d1 = [1 0 · · · 0].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2019

Then, it must be noticed that if a check node class has more than one edge of type one, the a posteriori probability of the variable nodes of class one never tends to the delta function at infinity regardless of the number of iterations and the quality of physical channel, which makes the definition of threshold meaningless. Thus, the EDVs for check node classes must be carefully chosen to satisfy

g1,i ≤ 1, fori = 1, 2, . . . , nc.

(17)

When MET-LDPC code ensembles of low rates are designed, we intentionally introduce the condition in (17) to the random generation of EDVs for both establishing the initial population and conducting the mutation process, which greatly improves the convergence of the optimization process.
2) Optimization for Node Distributions: In the inner optimization, the DE requires randomly generated z vectors, equivalently node distributions, to search for an optimized node distribution. In the random generations, some of z vectors lead to invalid node distributions which have some negative node fractions, i.e. ζi < 0 for some i. The anomalies can be readily avoided by considering z vectors only with nonnegative elements, i.e.

1

zi =

p i=1

zi

zi

for

i = 1, 2, . . . , p.

where zi is a random number following a uniform distribution, U[0, 1]. Thereby, node distributions with randomly generated vector z have only positive elements, which significantly speeds up the DE in the inner optimization. Finally, we should discuss a simple but efficient way to expedite the inner optimization by choosing the number of edge types to satisfy the equality: nv +nc−(ne+1) = 1. Considering that matrix A has a dimension of (ne+1)×(nv +nc), the matrix of the linear system in (12) has a null space of dimension one with a high probability, which in turn asserts a single positive solution, i.e. p = 1. Note that the DE in the inner optimization searches for an optimum node distribution among positive solutions in the null space. Thus, when there is a single positive solution, the inner optimization has its output, i.e. the optimized node distribution, without performing the time-consuming DE.

V. OPTIMIZATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, it will be demonstrated that MET-LDPC code ensembles from the proposed design rule have higher, namely better, thresholds as compared to those of ensembles reported in open literature across a wide range of code rates. This work considers both bit-wise and block-wise thresholds [18] which allow one to predict error-floor performances at finite lengths. In particular, it is especially interesting to see that the proposed design rule provides MET-LDPC code ensembles at high code rates with thresholds close to channel capacity since the design of MET-LDPC code ensembles of high rates has remained rather untouched. In the code optimization, the parameters, i.e. the number of members in population (NP ), the mutation coefficient (F ) and the crossover coefficient (Cr) are set to 1000, 0.5, and 0.5 for the DE in the outer optimization, and the ones in the inner

optimization are set to 50, 0.5, and 0.5, respectively. The DE
for the outer optimization iterates until it reaches a preset value, Gmax = 1000, while Gmax is set to 100 for the DE in the inner optimization. Extensive code designs are carried out with various combinations of code parameters, i.e. ne, nv, nc, dmax and gmax, and twelve designed MET-LDPC code ensembles, denoted by Ci for i = 1, 2, . . . , 12, are presented. In this work, we measure performances of MET-LDPC code ensembles in terms of threshold and a capacity gap between
the threshold and channel capacity which is defined as

θˆ − θ∗(ν(r, x), μ(x))

θˆ

,

where θˆ is the channel parameter when the channel capacity is set to the rate R of the ensemble specified by (ν(r, x), μ(x)), e.g. θˆ for a rate R on BEC is θˆ = 1 − R, when the channel parameter, θ for BEC is chosen to be the erasure probability.
Since we consider uniform physical channels, i.e. BEC and AWGN channel, the number of physical channel types, nτ is always set to one. Thus, the RDV is either bi = [1 0] for the variable node class with punctured bits or bi = [0 1] for the variable node classes receiving outputs from a physical
channel. In addition, it is assumed that when punctured bits
are introduced in an ensemble, only the first variable node class has the punctured bits, i.e. b1 = [1 0] and bi = [0 1] for all i = 1.

A. Optimizations on the Binary Erasure Channel
In this subsection, we first design MET-LDPC ensembles on the BEC at rate 0.5 with three different combinations of code parameters which are summarized in Table I, and the combinations and corresponding designed MET-LDPC ensembles are denoted by C1, C2, and C3. For comparisons, we take a code ensemble of rate 0.5 from [14], denoted by Code 3, as a reference whose parameters are also summarized in Table I where the ensembles with b1,0 = 1 have punctured bits in their first variable node class. In addition, in the multinomial for variable nodes, i.e. ν(r, x), without loss of generality, the first term corresponds to the variable node class with punctured bits if the ensemble contains punctured bits. It is noticed in Table I that all the ensembles C1, C2, C3 and Code 3 have punctured bits. The pairs of multinomials for the ensembles C1, C2, C3, and Code 3 are listed in Table II where it is noticed that the multinomial for the check nodes, μ(x) of Code 3 is in the concentrated form. That is, each term in the multinomial consists of up to two different edge types, and the degrees of each edge type are two adjacent numbers or a single number, e.g. the degrees of edge type one, i.e. the powers of x1 in μ(x), are two and three. Meanwhile, for the ensembles C1, C2, and C3, the multinomials for check nodes are not in the concentrated form which the proposed design rule does not assume.
The designed ensembles and Code 3 are evaluated in terms of threshold and capacity gap, and the results are compared in Table II where it can be noticed that C1 has a better threshold performance even if C1 has a limited set of code parameters as compared to the reference code, Code 3. That is, the numbers

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JEONG AND HA: ON THE DESIGN OF MET-LDPCs

TABLE I CODE PARAMETERS

6663

TABLE II NODE-PERSPECTIVE MULTINOMIALS OF MET-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES AND THEIR THRESHOLDS AND CAPACITY GAPS

of variable and check node classes for ensemble C1 are one and two less than those of Code 3, respectively. Meanwhile, the ensembles C2 and C3 are designed with reduced maximum degrees but have comparable performances to that of Code 3. The reduced maximum degrees may allow one to implement
MET-LDPC codes with a lower complexity. In particular, it was shown in [4] that the decoding latency is proportional
to the maximum check node degree.
The MET-LDPC ensembles in Table II are also compared in terms of decoding complexity which is measured with a
normalized edge density [32] defined as the average number of edges per message bit, i.e. E/(r · n) where E, r and n are the total number of edges, code rate and length, respectively. The decoding complexities of C1, C2, C3 and Code 3 are listed in the last column of TABLE II where it is noticed that C1 has a better threshold performance at a reduced normalized edge density. In addition, the comparison between C3 and Code 3 shows that C3 has a similar threshold performance even at both

a smaller maximum check node and a reduced normalized edge density. Meanwhile, in the design of the ensemble C2, the maximum degrees of both variable and check nodes are set smaller than those of Code 3. That is, the maximum variable and check node degrees are set to 4 and 6, respectively while both maximum variable and check node degrees for Code 3 are 8. The comparison between C2 and Code 3 shows that both have similar threshold performances even if the reduced maximum node degrees are assumed. However, C2 demands a higher normalized edge density in exchange for the reduced decoding latency.
Now, we design MET-LDPC code ensembles on the BEC across a wide range of code rates from 0.1 to 0.9, and the sequence of rates are listed in Table III. The code design is carried out with different sets of code parameters which are denoted by C4 ∼ C9 in Table I. It is noticed that the ensembles corresponding to C4 and C5 do not have puncturing. In Fig. 6, the capacity gaps of designed ensembles for rates

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2019

TABLE III MET-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES OF C9 ON BEC

Fig. 6. Capacity gaps of ensembles C4 ∼ C9 on BEC at rates from 0.1000 to Fig. 7. Capacity gaps of ensembles C4 ∼ C9 on BEC at rates from 0.5000 to

0.3333.

0.9000.

less than 0.5 are compared. The comparison shows that all the capacity gaps are less than 0.02. In particular, the thresholds of ensembles C8 and C9 look consistently very close to the capacity, and their capacity gaps are less than 0.01 at all the code rates. Besides, the ensembles are also evaluated for rates higher than and equal to 0.5 and compared with protograph LDPC codes [26] in Fig. 7 where all the MET-LDPC code ensembles have relatively small capacity gaps up to

rate 0.6667. Note that C4 and C5 do not have punctured bits, and the comparison between the threshold performances of C4 and C5 shows interesting behaviors. That is, the threshold of ensembles C4 becomes severally deteriorated as the rate gets larger than 0.6667 while such performance degradation for C5
does not appear, which is due to the large maximum degrees
as compared to C4. The threshold comparison between C4 and C5 tells that the performance degradation at high rates can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JEONG AND HA: ON THE DESIGN OF MET-LDPCs

6665

be alleviated by increasing the maximum degrees as shown in the case of C5. However, the threshold improvement by increasing the maximum degrees is achieved at the expense of growing complexity. On the contrary, the ensembles with puncturing, i.e. C6 ∼ C9 have thresholds close to the capacity even at moderate maximum degrees. It is observed that the capacity gaps of C6 ∼ C9 are less than 0.02 except for the highest rate 0.9. It is generally known that the puncturing plays the role of increasing the maximum check node degrees. In Fig. 7, the ensemble C7 looks to have thresholds consistently close to the capacity at all the design rates with a combination of two edge types, and three and two variable node and check node classes, respectively. The pairs of multinomials for the ensemble C9 at the design rates are given in Table III where thresholds and capacity gaps of C9 are also listed.
The density evolution traces the evolution of bit-wise average message error probability, and thus some LDPC codes with good threshold performances may have high error-floors at finite lengths due to their low weight codewords. To avoid the low weight codewords, MET-LDPC codes must be design to maximize block-wise thresholds, which have been extensively studied for binary MET-LDPC codes in [18], non-binary MET-LDPC codes in [12] and MET doubly generalized LDPC codes in [24]. In particular, a simple but efficient test was introduced in Theorem 3 of [18]. That is, when an MET-LDPC code passes the test, the designed MET-LDPC code does not suffer from a high error-floor due to low weight codewords. In this work, we incorporate the test in the design rule and repeat the code design with the parameters for C4 and C5. The threshold performances with the additional constraint are denoted by C4 with 1/t < 1 and C5 with 1/t < 1 in Fig. 7 where the MET-LDPC codes with/without the constraint for block-wise threshold have similar performances.

Fig. 8. Capacity gaps of ensembles C4 ∼ C9 on BI-AWGN channel at rates from 0.5000 to 0.9000.

B. Optimizations on the BI-AWGN Channel
For BI-AWGN channel, we repeat the code design at rate 0.1 with the code parameters denoted by C10, C11 and C12 in Table I and summarize the designed ensembles in Table II. While the threshold of BI-AWGN channel is defined in Section II-B as noise standard deviation, σ, we will convert thresholds in the noise standard deviation into Eb/N0 in this section since Eb/N0 is a more natural measure. For comparisons, we take reference ensembles of the same rate from Table X in [29] and Figs. 5a and 5b in [14] which are denoted by Table X, Fig. 5.a [29], Fig. 5.b [29] in Tables I and II, respectively. The ensembles, C10 and Table X of [29] have similar code parameters while the ensemble, Table X of [29] is obtained via an exhaustive search with larger maximum degrees. Despite the larger maximum degrees for Table X of [29], the designed ensemble, C10 provides a better threshold performance. The ensembles, Fig. 5.a and Fig. 5.b in [14] are designed with/without puncturing, respectively, and the introduction of puncturing in Fig. 5.b in [14] allows a better threshold performance as compared to the one without puncturing, i.e. Fig. 5.a in [14]. Similarly, the ensembles, C11 and C12 are designed with/without puncturing based on

Fig. 9. BER comparisons among C8, an MET-LDPC code from [29] and an AR4JA code at a rate of 0.6667.
the proposed design rule. The comparison between C11 and Fig. 5.a in [14] shows that the designed ensemble outperforms the one from [14], which is also true for the comparison between ensembles with puncturing, i.e. C12 and Fig. 5.b in [14]. For fair comparisons, we intentionally choose the code parameters for designed ensembles as limited ones as compared to the reference ensembles. That is, the designed ensembles have smaller maximum degrees and/or numbers of classes.
In terms of decoding complexity, comparisons can be conducted between MET-LDPC codes with the same code parameters. It is noticed in Table II that the code parameters of C10, C11 and C12 are set to the same as the ones denoted by TABLE X [29], Fig. 5a [14] and Fig. 5b [14], respectively. The comparisons clearly show that the ensembles from the proposed design rule achieve better threshold performances on AWGN channel at reduced complexities in terms of both the maximum check node degree and the normalized edge density.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 67, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2019
TABLE IV MET-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES OF C8 FOR CODE RATES LARGER THAN AND EQUAL TO 0.5 ON BI-AWGN CHANNEL

To see performance variations over a range of code rates
which are listed in Table IV, MET-LDPC code ensembles are designed for BI-AWGN channel with parameters of C4 ∼ C9 in Table I. Among the designed ensembles, the pairs of multinomials for C8 are shown in Table IV. The thresholds of the designed ensembles are depicted in Fig. 8 where we compare the thresholds with those of LDPC-like codes [16],
a standard irregular LDPC code [37] and a quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code [36]. Note that the Eb/N0 gap in Fig. 8 is in linear scale. As shown in Fig. 7, the ensemble without puncturing, i.e. C4, loses its threshold performances as the rate grows, which can be alleviated by increasing the maximum degrees in C5. On the contrary, the other ensembles with puncturing, C6 ∼ C9, stay very close to the capacity across all the rates. The code designs for C4 and C5 are conducted with the constraint for block-wise threshold, and their threshold performances are depicted in Fig. 8 where the designs without the constraint are denoted by C4 with 1/t < 1 and C5 with 1/t < 1. It is observed in Fig. 8 that the designs with/without the additional constraint have almost the same
threshold performances. Finally, we implement MET-LDPC codes of length 104 at
code rate 0.6667 in accordance with the degree distributions of C8 and the ones in (19) of [29]. In addition to the MET-LDPC codes, we implement a protograph LDPC code
called accumulate-repeat-4-jagged-accmulate (AR4JA) code in
[9]. In the implementations, parity-check matrices for the three LDPC codes are constructed with the progressive edge
growth algorithm [13]. For fair comparisons, we also consider
decoding complexities of the LDPC codes under comparison. The AR4JA code, MET-LDPC code in [29] and C8 in the comparison have their decoding complexities of 7.50, 5.06, and 4.99, respectively. The comparisons in Fig. 9 show that the MET-LDPC code for C8 outperforms the other competing

LDPC codes in the interval of simulated BER values. In particular, it is observed in Fig. 9 that the MET-LDPC code for C8 has 0.3dB and 0.2dB Eb/N0 improvements at a BER of 10−5 over the one from [29] and the AR4JA code, respectively.
VI. CONCLUSION
This work proposes a code design rule for MET-LDPC codes which efficiently searches for good MET-LDPC code ensembles without resorting to any restrictions on degree distributions. The proposed code design is performed by conducting joint optimizations for edge and node distributions, which is possible by introducing an efficient scheme to find valid node distributions for a given edge distribution. Extensive MET-LDPC code designs are conducted on BEC and BI-AWGN channel across a wide range of code rates, which confirm that the proposed design rule provides better MET-LDPC code ensembles regardless of channel and code rate as compared to other design rules reported in open literature. We believe the results of this work can be applicable to wide range of applications, e.g. the reconciliation process in quantum key distribution and storage devices which require very low and high rate MET-LDPC codes with good threshold performances, respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications (DVB-S2), Standard ETSI EN 302 307 v1.2.1, Aug. 2009.
[2] I. Andriyanova and J. Tillich, “Designing a good low-rate sparsegraph code,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 3181–3190, Nov. 2012.
[3] M. H. Azmi, J. Yuan, G. Lechner, and L. K. Rasmussen, “Design of multi-edge-type bilayer-expurgated LDPC codes for decode-andforward in relay channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 2993–3006, Nov. 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JEONG AND HA: ON THE DESIGN OF MET-LDPCs

6667

[4] T. Bhatt, V. Sundaramurthy, V. Stolpman, and D. McCain, “Pipelined block-serial decoder architecture for structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., vol. 4, May 2006, pp. 1–4.
[5] S. Das and P. N. Suganthan, “Differential evolution: A survey of the state-of-the-art,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 4–31, Feb. 2011.
[6] L. L. Dines, “On positive solutions of a system of linear equations,” Ann. Math., vol. 28, nos. 1–4, pp. 386–392, Jan. 1926.
[7] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Low-rate LDPC codes with simple protograph structure,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Sep. 2005, pp. 1622–1626.
[8] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ‘turbo-like’ codes,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., 1998, pp. 201–210.
[9] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Construction of protograph LDPC codes with linear minimum distance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2006, pp. 664–668.
[10] J. Du, L. Yang, J. Yuan, L. Zhou, and X. He, “Bit mapping design for LDPC coded BICM schemes with multi-edge type EXIT chart,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 722–725, Apr. 2017.
[11] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[12] G. Garrammone, D. Declercq, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Weight distributions of non-binary multi-edge type LDPC code ensembles: Analysis and efficient evaluation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 1463–1475, Mar. 2017.
[13] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[14] S. Jayasooriya, M. Shirvanimoghaddam, L. Ong, and S. J. Johnson, “Joint optimisation technique for multi-edge type low-density paritycheck codes,” IET Commun., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 61–68, Dec. 2017.
[15] S. Jayasooriya, M. Shirvanimoghaddam, L. Ong, G. Lechner, and S. J. Johnson, “A new density evolution approximation for LDPC and multi-edge type LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4044–4056, Oct. 2016.
[16] S. J. Johnson, “Reported thresholds and BER performance for LDPC and LDPC-like codes,” Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng., Univ. Newcastle, Australia, Tech. Rep. SPM855, 2012.
[17] P. Jouguet, S. Kunz-Jacques, and A. Leverrier, “Long-distance continuous-variable quantum key distribution with a Gaussian modulation,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 84, no. 6, 2011, Art. no. 062317.
[18] K. Kasai, T. Awano, D. Declercq, C. Poulliat, and K. Sakaniwa, “Weight distributions of multi-edge type LDPC codes,” IEICE Trans. Fundam. Electron., Commun. Comput. Sci., vol. 93, no. 11, pp. 1942–1948, 2010.
[19] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645, Aug. 1996.
[20] O. Mangasarian and M. C. Ferris, “Uniqueness of integer solution of linear equations,” Optim. Lett., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 559–565, 2010.
[21] M. Mario, F. Chen, L. M. Zhang, and P. Gulak, “Key reconciliation with low-density parity-check codes for long-distance quantum cryptography,” 2017, arXiv:1702.07740. [Online]. Available: https:// arxiv.org/abs/1702.07740
[22] H. V. B. Neto, W. Henkel, and V. C. da Rocha, “Multi-edge type unequal error protecting low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Oct. 2011, pp. 335–339.
[23] A. Osseiran et al., “Scenarios for 5G mobile and wireless communications: The vision of the METIS project,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 26–35, May 2014.
[24] E. Paolini, M. F. Flanagan, M. Chiani, and M. P. Fossorier, “Stability of iterative decoding of multi-edge type doubly-generalized LDPC codes over the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[25] L. Ping and K. Y. Wu, “Concatenated tree codes: A low-complexity, high-performance approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 791–799, Feb. 2001.
[26] A. K. Pradhan, A. Thangaraj, and A. Subramanian, “Construction of near-capacity protograph LDPC code sequences with block-error thresholds,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 27–37, Jan. 2016.
[27] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[28] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[29] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” in Proc. Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece 60th Birthday, Pasadena, CA, USA, 2002, pp. 24–25.
[30] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[31] A. Shokrollahi and R. Storn, “Design of efficient erasure codes with differential evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2000, pp. 1–5.
[32] B. Smith, M. Ardakani, W. Yu, and F. R. Kschischang, “Design of irregular LDPC codes with optimized performance-complexity tradeoff,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 489–499, Feb. 2010.
[33] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential evolution–A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optim., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 341–359, 1997.
[34] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), vol. 5, May 2003, pp. 3125–3129.
[35] X. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Yu, and H. Guo, “High speed error correction for continuous-variable quantum key distribution with multiedge type LDPC code,” 2017, arXiv:1711.01783. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1711.01783.pdf
[36] X. Wu, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Construction of high-rate QC-LDPC codes with multi-weight circulants,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Sep. 2016, pp. 21–25.
[37] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[38] L. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, “Design of multi-edge-type LDPC codes for high-order coded modulation,” in Proc. 12th Can. Workshop Inf. Theory (CWIT), May 2011, pp. 5–8.
[39] L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-edge-type low-density parity-check codes for bandwidth-efficient modulation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 43–52, Jan. 2013.
Suhwang Jeong received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Dajeon, South Korea, in 2015, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering. His research interests include error-correcting codes, coding theory, and information reconciliation for quantum key distribution systems.
Jeongseok Ha (M’06–SM’17) received the B.E. degree in electronics from Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea, in 1992, the M.S. degree in electronic and electrical engineering from the Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea, in 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, in 2003. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon. His research interests include theories and applications of error-control codes and physical layer security.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:53:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

