2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

Variational Message Passing Without Initialization Using A Free Energy Constraint
Murthy V. R. S. Devarakonda Email: murthyds@ieee.org

Abstract—In iterative algorithms with graphical models, it is common to initialize messages. But this approach is not suitable in certain applications. In this paper, it is conjectured that if some messages are confined to a ball around their initialized values, then initialization can be avoided. Towards this goal, for networks specified with a bipartite graph, a variant of the sum-product algorithm is derived by adding an inequality constraint on the variable free energy in the underlying Bethe optimization problem. In the binary case, this leads to an upper bound that restricts the ℓ1 norm of the extrinsic message (vector) to a ball around its (otherwise) initial value. Results are reported for binary LDPC decoders through simulations which confirm that initialization between decoding attempts can be eliminated and show that the algorithm tends to outperform the standard sum-product. A few more observations and comments on this approach, relation with other variational methods, and applications to analog processing and inference over distributed networks are outlined in the end.
I. INTRODUCTION
In any iterative algorithm, messages or unknown parameters must be initialized; the initial values are either fixed, or obtained from other sources. For a digital implementation this is trivial and does not pose a problem. However, inference on graphical models, with localized computations, has strong connections with electrical networks and analog implementations. The sum-product algorithm arises from the Bethe free energy minimization problem [1] and its relation to analog decoding has been well established [2]; but the need to initialize messages makes the analog designs impractical. One also finds other situations where initialization is infeasible. For example, the exact sampling time of data depends on the output of the inference engine or the arrival times of data are not synchronized with the inference process.
In this paper, we are particularly interested in the computation of a posteriori probabilities of discrete variables whose joint density is induced by a graph. We are interested in an approach that does not require initialization. Moreover, we seek to find an algorithm that does not deviate much from the sum-product algorithm. This approach is motivated both by analog decoders as well as by the observation that the sum-product algorithm arising from the (non-convex) Bethe free energy approximation generally gives better results [3] in many cases. In particular, we focus attention on a factor graph with binary variables and a single variable parametrization of messages using the log-likelihood ratios (LLR). In this case, the initialized message is an all-zero vector. In this paper, we make the reasonable assumption that the dynamics of the algorithm are continuous near the initialization point. That

is, we assume that if the LLR vector of the message (that needs initialization) stays within a ball of bounded radius throughout the iterative process, then message passing without reinitialization should be feasible. However, this may raise a fundamental question whether computation with arbitrary initial messages would give any meaningful result. We approach this problem indirectly by modifying the underlying optimization problem. We derive an algorithm with the required features by constraining some of the (data independent) entropy terms and (data dependent) average energy terms in the Bethe free energy. In other words, we impose an additional “inequality” constraint on some of the free energy terms in the cost function. This only restricts the feasible region to the interior of the set of locally consistent marginals [4] and leaves the cost function unchanged. Using this setup, a new message passing algorithm is proposed that makes use of a Lagrange multiplier to “control” the growth of the extrinsic messages arriving at a variable node. The behavior of the algorithm is studied via simulations for LDPC codes of varying row and column weights of the parity check matrix and different code-rates. Simulation results confirm the conjecture and show that this method performs without reinitialization between decoding attempts and also converges in all the cases studied so far. However, a proof of convergence is not available. It is also observed that the bound on the extrinsic messages admits a sufficiently large range and is tolerant to variations. Finally, the algorithm performs comparably with or slightly better than the standard sum-product message passing algorithm at medium to high SNRs.
The paper is organized as follows. The algorithm is introduced and message passing rules are derived in Sec. II. Sec. III discusses decoder implementation details and simulation results. In Sec. IV the proposed approach is compared with a few variational approaches from the literature and some applications are outlined. The paper is concluded in Sec. V.
II. INFERENCE WITH VARIABLE FREE ENERGY CONSTRAINT
The following treatment applies to any graph over discrete variables. Details relevant to the decoding of binary LDPC codes are discussed in Sec. III(A). Fig. 1 shows a section of a Forney-style factor graph (notation as per [5]) of some network along with the conditional densities for the observations. {X1, X2, . . . , XN } is the set of variables and Y1 = y1, Y2 = y2, . . . , YN = yN are assumed to be observed. The constraint factors are denoted by ψℓ(Cℓ) where Cℓ is the subset of vari-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4799-5985-3/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

47

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

ψℓ(Cℓ)

−→µjℓ(xjℓ) ←µ−jℓ(xjℓ)

...

...

Xjℓ

= φj(Vj)

ηj

Xj

p(yj |xj )

Fig. 1: A section of a factor graph over discrete variables

ables connected to the constraint factor ψℓ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }. The factors φj(Vj), Vj = {xj, xjℓ : ℓ ∈ Nφj } are the product of Kronecker delta functions δ(xj − xjℓ), ∀ℓ ∈ Nφj representing the equality constraints between the variable Xj and the set of auxiliary variables {Xjℓ : ℓ ∈ Nφj }. The factors p(yj|xj) > 0 are the conditional densities. We use the index sets Nψℓ or Nφj to denote the factors connected to a constraint factor ψℓ, or to an equality factor φj respectively. We use the indexes j or k for the variables and ℓ or α for
the constraint factors throughout this paper. In case of LDPC
codes, the constraint factors represent the indicator functions
for the parity check constraints. The graph represents the unnormalized joint distribution p(x|y),





M

N

p(x|y) ∝ ψℓ(Cℓ)  φj(Vj)p(yj|xj)

(1)

ℓ=1

j=1

The standard inference problem to compute the marginal a posteriori probabilities, p(xj|y), is the minimization of the approximate Bethe free energy functional

N

Fbethe(Q) = − Eqj log p(yj |xj )
j=1

M

− EqCℓ log ψℓ(Cℓ) − H(Q),

(2)

ℓ=1

where Ep is the expectation operator over distribution p, and the first two terms are the local average energies associated

with the conditional densities and the constraint factors. H(Q)

is the Bethe entropy approximation, defined as

N

H(Q) = − Eqj log qj(xj)
j=1

M

N

− EqCℓ log qCℓ (Cℓ) +

Eqjℓ log qjℓ(xjℓ), (3)

ℓ=1

j=1 ℓ∈Nφj

and qj(xj), qCℓ (Cℓ) and qjℓ(xjℓ) unambiguously refer to the beliefs over the code variables Xj, the subsets Cℓ, or the auxiliary variables Xjℓ respectively. In the above formulation, the energy and entropy terms associated with the equality factors, φj(Vj), do not appear explicitly. This formulation corresponds to the graph with the boxed factor denoted as ηj in Fig. 1 and is more convenient for deriving the message passing rules.
The optimization variables {qj(xj), qCℓ (Cℓ), qjℓ(xjℓ)} form a set of locally consistent marginal distributions [4] that belong to the local polytope L(G). Standard sum-product message passing begins after initializing the “extrinsic” messages, −→µjℓ(xjℓ), towards the variable nodes to equally likely distributions. We conjecture that initialization can be avoided
by keeping the extrinsic message vector within a ball of
bounded radius from the initialized vector. We derive the
necessary condition required for this by modifying the op-
timization problem by upper bounding certain energy terms
in the free energy functional. Towards this end, let us define Ey − j Eqj log p(yj|xj) as the local average energy associated with observations and H(X) − j Eqj log qj(xj) as the local entropy term associated with the variables. We note that the term Ey − H(X), termed here as variable free energy, has an upper bound and denote this by Bupper. We propose to include this upper bound as an additional inequality
constraint. The modified optimization problem can now be
formally stated:

minimize
qj (xj ),qCℓ (Cℓ),qjℓ(xjℓ)
subject to

Fbethe(Q),

qjℓ(xjℓ)

=

qCℓ (Cℓ), ∀(j, ℓ),

Cℓ \xj ℓ

qjℓ(xjℓ)

= qj(xj), ∀ℓ ∈ Nφj ,

qCℓ (Cℓ)
Cℓ

= 1, ∀ℓ,

qj (xj )

= 1, ∀j,

xj

Ey − H(X)

≤ Bupper,

qj (xj ), qCℓ (Cℓ), qjℓ(xjℓ) ≥ 0.

At this point, we are not concerned about the exact value of the upper bound; this is discussed in detail in the next section. A message passing solution to the problem can be readily obtained from the first order necessary conditions [1]. The Lagrangian associated with this problem is,

L = Fbethe(Q)





+

λjℓ(xjℓ) qjℓ(xjℓ) −

qCℓ (Cℓ)

ℓ j∈Nψℓ xjℓ

Cℓ \xj ℓ

+

λαk(xkα) [qkα(xkα) − qk(xk)]

k α∈Nφk xkα

+ ω˜ [Ey − H(X) − Bupper] ,

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
48

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

where λjℓ(xjℓ), λαk(xkα) ∈ R and w˜ ≥ 0 are the Lagrange multipliers. The normalization and the non-negativity
constraints are not explicitly shown. Noting that the term Ey − H(X) also appears in Fbethe(Q), we can combine these terms to obtain a new parameter ω 1 + ω˜ where ω ≥ 1. It shall be noted that when ω = 1 (or ω˜ = 0), the problem reduces to the standard Bethe variational problem.
The resulting message passing update rules are stated below without proof; cf. Fig. 1.

Message from Constraint Node ℓ to Boxed Node ηk:

−→µkℓ(xkℓ) =

ψℓ(Cℓ)

←µ−jℓ(xjℓ)

(5)

Cℓ \xkℓ

j∈Nψℓ \k

Message from Boxed Node ηk to Constraint Node ℓ:

[−→µkα

(xkα

)]

1 ω

←µ−kℓ(xkℓ) = p(yk|xk) α∈Nφk−→µkℓ(xkℓ)

(6)

Variable Beliefs:

qk(xk) ∝ p(yk|xk)

[→−µkα

(xkα

)]

1 ω

(7)

α∈Nφk

When the upper bound is inactive, complementary slackness

condition [6] requires that ω = 1(or ω˜ = 0), and the updates

are identical to that of standard belief propagation. This is

true as long as we admit solutions to lie on the boundary

of the local polytope, L(G), allowing some of the beliefs

at the fixed points to be zero [1] [4]. As we are going to

show, by tightening the upper bound further, we can restrict

the feasible region to lie in the interior of L(G). This can

be justified in two ways. First, as long as the conditionals,

p(yj|xj), are strictly positive, the globally realizable marginals are also strictly positive, and hence lie in the interior of L(G).

Second, with message passing on a loopy graph, boundary

points are never achieved in a finite number of iterations (or

time). A tight upper bound may make the inequality constraint

active and lead to ω ≥ 1. A suitable choice keeps the

feasible region large enough to contain the globally realizable

marginals (which are known to be in L(G)), and small enough

to enable computations without reinitialization (which was the

original goal). This is discussed next.

A. An Upper Bound on Extrinsic Messages

We now restrict the discussion to binary LDPC codes

and show that the inequality constraint leads to an upper

bound on the extrinsic message vector. Instead of the original

form, we use a convenient parametrization for the bound

to suit practical implementation. We use the logarithm of

probability ratios as the exponential parametrization of all

the messages. Hence, if U is a binary random variable, we

define Lu

log

pU (u=0) pU (u=1)

as

the

corresponding

parameter.

By

denoting the Lk and the

LLR of the exponential

conditional parameters

odfen−→sµitkiℓe(sxpkℓ()y,k←|µ−xkkℓ)(xwkiℓt)h,

and qk(xk) with ρkℓ, (βkℓ + Lk), and ξk respectively, we can rewrite the message passing rules (5), (6), and (7) as follows:

αk =

ρkℓ,

(8)

ℓ∈Nφk

βkℓ =

1 ω

αk − ρkℓ,

(9)

ξk = Lk +

1 ω

αk ,

(10)

where, for convenience, we introduced an additional param-

eter, αk, which refers to the “total extrinsic ” information arriving at variable node k. The computation of ρkℓ depends on the nature of the constraint factors. For a binary parity

check constraint, we obtain the tanh rule [5],





ρkℓ = 2 tanh−1 

tanh

βjℓ + Lj 2

.

(11)

j∈Nψℓ \k

Theorem 1. For binary variables, the variable free energy term

is upper bounded by

N
Ey − H(X) ≤ − min [log p(yj|xj = 0), log p(yj|xj = 1)] ,
j=1
(12)

where equality is achieved only when all the node beliefs take

extreme values of zero or one. If the beliefs qj(xj) for every j are constrained to be strictly positive, then this corresponds to

a bound on the extrinsic message vector α = {α1, . . . , αN }:

α1≤ ω

L 1+

ξmax 1

(13)

for some ξmax.

Proof: The proof is straightforward by expanding Ey − H(X) term by term:

Eyk − H(Xk) = −Eqk log p(yk|xk) + Eqk log qk(xk), ≤ max [− log p(yk|xk = 0), − log p(yk|xk = 1)] , = − min [log p(yk|xk = 0), log p(yk|xk = 1)] ,

where, in step two, equality is achieved when qk(xk) = 0 or 1. Combining the results for all k gives (12). When the beliefs

are constrained to be strictly positive, it implies that the log-

probability ratios ξj are strictly bounded. Hence, the vector ξ {ξ1, . . . , ξN } is bounded (in the ℓ1 norm):

ξ 1 ≤ ξmax 1.

(14)

By applying triangle inequality in (10) and using the above result, we obtain (13).

III. DECODER IMPLEMENTATION WITHOUT INITIALIZATION
Equation (13) tells that the upper bound on the total extrinsic message vector, α, is limited to a ball whose size depends on the magnitude of the input LLRs and ξmax, which is not known in advance. In the following, a heuristic is developed to tighten the bound further and it is argued that this depends mainly on L 1 to meet the desired goal of decoding without

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
49

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

initialization. Using this, a method to compute the parameter

ω in (9) and (10) is proposed and its effectiveness is verified

through simulations. From (10) we note that

α1 ω

is

at

least

as

large as L 1. Otherwise, there exists some input Lj for which

the

extrinsic

message

|

αj ω

|

<

|Lj |

such

that

an

error,

if

need

be, would not be corrected. An upper bound on

α1 ω

is

more

involved and depends on various factors. Loosely speaking, at

a variable node, the outgoing messages, βkℓ tend to increase

in magnitude, whereas, at a parity check node, the magnitudes

of ρkℓ tend to decrease. These depend respectively (for every k and ℓ) on the variable node degree, Nφk (cf. (8)), and the parity check node degree, Nψℓ (cf. (11)). The total growth in
the extrinsic message in one iteration also depends on the girth

of the code as well as the magnitude of the inputs L 1. For

the algorithm to function without initialization, the messages

should evolve towards an equally likely distribution (or the

αk’s should move towards zero) whenever there is an abrupt

change in the inputs (see Fig. 3 ahead). From (9) and (11) it

is seen that this will not happen if

α1 ω

is

too

large

compared

to L 1 : the decoder “gets stuck” in its current state. In

summary, the Lagrange multiplier ω should be updated in

every iteration to ensure that

L 1<

α1 ω

<κ

L

1

for some

κ > 1. Since a discontinuous update of ω leads to unstable

dynamics, we propose a smooth update,

1 = tanh θ L 1

(15)

ω

α1

as a continuous function of α 1 and L 1 for some θ > 1. While (15) is expected to be suitable for an analog implementation, other approaches for updating ω can be considered as well. A suitable range of values for θ is determined empirically by simulating the performance of a number of LDPC codes (taken from [7]) at a fixed BER of approximately 1e − 3. The results are shown in Fig. 2 for θ ranging from 0.5 to 10. The legend on the figure indicates the code parameters with (block length, code rate, column weight, row weight). For all the codes tested so far, the decoder works for a wide range of θ, without reinitialization between input changes. The performance of all the decoders is nearly the same for 1 < θ ≤ 5. Beyond this range, many of the decoders fail either because the bound is too tight to perform error correction, or so loose that the tracking ability is lost. This behavior is nearly uniform for codes with different coderates and row- and column- weights as observed from the experiments conducted so far, and demonstrates that message passing without initialization is practically viable. Fig. 3 shows the evolution plot of a decoder without reinitialization between input changes, for an LDPC code of block length 204.

In Fig. 4, BER performance of the proposed algorithm for

seven different LDPC codes is compared with that of standard

sum-product message passing (SPM). In all the cases, we

chose θ = 1.5 based on Fig. 2, and a fixed number of 20

iterations

for

decoding,

and

used

(15)

to

compute

1 ω

.

The

method performs slightly better than SPM at medium to high

SNRs. It also appears to be robust with respect to varying

degrees of the parity check and variable nodes.

1

(204,0.5,3,6)

(204,0.5,5,10)

(273,0.7,4,14)

(816,0.5,5,10)

(96,0.33,3,4)

0.1

(96,0.5,4,8)

BER

0.01

0.001

0.0001

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

θ

Fig. 2: Sensitivity of the decoder to the parameter, θ, at a BER of about 1e − 03 for different LDPC codes.

30
Input Changed
20

Decoder Output

10

0

-10

-20

-30 0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Iterations

Fig. 3: Evolution of LDPC decoder. At the time shown with

an arrow, the inputs are changed. The decoder recovers and

produces a new set of outputs, without reinitialization.

IV. DISCUSSION
There are some subtle differences with other approaches that are worth pointing out. The algorithm tends to perform comparably or better than standard sum-product, which uses message initialization. Note that in case of a digital implementation, nothing prevents us from initializing the messages and using a trade-off between performance gain and the number of iterations. It has been noticed that with initialization enabled, the algorithm converges faster and also outperforms standard sum-product by about 0.2dB at as low as 7 iterations (with a corresponding number of iterations used in SPM for fair comparison), and by about 0.5dB at 10 iterations, for the (204, 0.5, 3, 6) LDPC code. We also notice that, in Fig. 4, the algorithm performs better near the error-floor region of two codes (block lengths 204 and 1057) compared to SPM. The examples in this paper are concerned mainly with binary codes. For non-binary variables, it is expected that the ideas in Sec. II(A) can be adapted using a suitable parametrization of messages from an exponential family of distributions. Similarly, for problems other than LDPC codes, the only change comes from (11). How the algorithm performs in these cases is yet to be determined.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
50

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

1 0.1 0.01 0.001 0.0001

(204,0.5,3,6) SPM (204,0.5,3,6) VFEC (204,0.5,5,10) SPM (204,0.5,5,10) VFEC
(96,0.33,3,4) SPM (96,0.33,3,4) VFEC
(96,0.5,4,8) SPM (96,0.5,4,8) VFEC (273,0.7,4,14) SPM (273,0.7,4,14) VFEC (816,0.5,5,10) SPM (816,0.5,5,10) VFEC (1057,0.77,3,13) SPM (1057,0.77,3,13) VFEC

BER

1e-05

1e-06

1e-07

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

SNR

Fig. 4: Coded BER versus SNR for LDPC codes. Solid lines correspond to standard sum-product (SPM), and dashed lines to the proposed algorithm (VFEC).

Message passing rules with similar features have appeared in literature. In (4) the entropies of the code variables are weighted by ω˜. Such weighting of entropies appeared in connection with convex approximations and leads to message passing rules that are quite similar to those in this paper. Examples are tree-reweighted approximations [8], uniformly re-weighted belief propagation [9], and various convex approximations [3]. In all these cases, the message scaling is typically fixed. The present algorithm differs in two aspects. First, it does not explicitly rely on convexification of the cost function. Second, the message scaling is time-varying wherein the parameter ω is dynamically computed and applied. Some of the aforementioned work is concerned with approximations to beliefs or to the partition function. The applicability of the proposed method to these problems needs further work.
Some applications that can benefit from the proposed algorithm are now outlined. (a) Analog Decoding: In earlier work, message passing algorithms with localized computations were shown to be ideally suited for analog decoder implementations [2]. The analog implementations however required elaborate control circuitry to initialize the hidden messages between decoding attempts. The interconnect complexity scales as the number of edges (in the factor graph) in this case. In contrast, the proposed algorithm requires rescaling all the extrinsic messages characterized by only a single parameter (i.e., ω) and the complexity scales only as the number of variables. As the algorithm is noted to be less sensitive to parameter choice, it is expected that the computation in (15) can be be replaced with suitable analog approximations. (b) Joint Timing Synchronization and Decoding: Another advantage is that the sample-and-hold at the decoder inputs can also be eliminated, as long as the input changes relatively slowly. This may be useful in systems that operate entirely in the baseband. In [10], a simple communication receiver is proposed where decoding takes place without knowing the exact sampling time in advance. The receiver demonstrates an aspect of code-aided

synchronization, that pushes the task of timing synchronization to the end of the processing chain. (c) Message Passing for Sensor Networks: In distributed hypothesis testing problems such as fault localization and event detection [11], sensors send local measurements corresponding to a global problem to a data center. It is assumed that the data from each sensor arrive asynchronously and are usually sparse in time. In an ad-hoc network, it may not be feasible for a data center to restart its processing algorithm every time it receives a new measurement. It would be advantageous to perform communication, inference, and sensing simultaneously.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Motivated by the need to avoid message initialization in analog processing, a new class of algorithms is introduced using an inequality constraint in the Bethe variational problem. For binary variables, a variant of sum-product algorithm derived from this leads to an upper bound on the ℓ1 norm of the extrinsic message vector and is conjectured to enable message passing without initialization. Experiments on a few binary LDPC decoders demonstrated that the algorithm functions without initialization and gives good results. However, a proof of convergence, or conditions and parameter choices for which the method always succeeds are not available. The viability of analog decoders using this method is yet to be established. As the treatment of the inequality constraint only assumes strictly positive node beliefs, it is expected that this method can be adapted to non-binary variables and applications other than LDPC decoding.
REFERENCES
[1] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, July 2005.
[2] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarko¨y, “Probability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 837–843, Feb. 2001.
[3] O. Meshi, A. Jaimovich, A. Globerson, and N. Friedman, “Convexifying the bethe free energy,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, ser. UAI ’09, 2009, pp. 402–410.
[4] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, Graphical Models, Exponential Families, and Variational Inference, ser. Foundations and Trends R in Machine Learning. now Publishers, Hanover, MA, USA, 2008, vol. 1:1–2.
[5] H.-A. Loeliger, “An introduction to factor graphs,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–41, Jan. 2004.
[6] D. G. Luenberger and Y. Ye, Linear and Nonlinear Programming. Springer International Edition, 2008.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay”, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes (hypertext archive),” 1999, http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data. html.
[8] M. Wainwright, T. Jaakkola, and A. Willsky, “A new class of upper bounds on the log partition function,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2313–2335, 2005.
[9] H. Wymeersch, F. Penna, and V. Savic, “Uniformly reweighted belief propagation: A factor graph approach,” in Information Theory Proceedings (ISIT), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on, 2011, pp. 2000– 2004.
[10] M. Devarakonda and H.-A. Loeliger, “Continuous-Time Matched Filtering and Decoding Without Synchronization,” in Proceedings IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), Taormina, Italy, Oct. 11–16 2009, pp. 139–143.
[11] S. Kar, R. Tandon, H. Poor, and S. Cui, “Distributed detection in noisy sensor networks,” in Information Theory Proceedings (ISIT), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on, July 2011, pp. 2856–2860.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:11:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
51

