2014 9th International Conference on Communications and Networking in China (CHINACOM)

New and efficient decoding architecture for QuasiCyclic LDPC codes

Zhiming Fan, Zhanji Wu*, Hui Che
School of Information and Communication Engineering Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Email: wuzhanji@bupt.edu.cn, fanzhiming1990@163.com

Xiaoping Zhou
Institute of Microelectronics of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China

Abstract— In this paper, a new and efficient decoding architecture, Single-Scan Layer Decoding (SLD), is realized in FPGA for multi-rate Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes. The SLD algorithm simplifies the nodes updating process and messages storing process of the offset min-sum algorithm, speeding up the decoding process and reducing nearly a half of resources consumption. Besides, the SLD algorithm, introducing the semi-parallel architecture into decoding architecture, can increase the convergence rate by 2X and decrease the interconnect complexity of hardware implementation. For multirate QC-LDPC Codes in 802.11.n, comparing with float-point software implementation, the degradations of the fixed-point SLD algorithm with 10 iterations in FPGA are all less than 0.1dB and the throughput of different code rates are all above 100Mbps.
Keywords— Single-Scan Layer Decoding(SLD), Quasi-Cyclic LDPC, Offset Min-Sum, Semi-parallel Architecture, Convergence Rate, Throughput.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, the structured Quasi Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) code has been widely used in many practical systems due to its efficient hardware implementation and good error performance [1]. The sum-product algorithm is the most powerful iterative soft decoding algorithm for LDPC codes [1]. Considering the computational complexity, the offset min-sum (OMS) algorithm is demonstrated in [2] [3] because it is simpler in computation and there are only minimization and summation operations used in computation instead of multiplication and summation operations used by sum-product algorithm.
However, the OMS algorithm is also still expensive for hardware implementations since two scans for nodes are required in each iteration [4] [5]. Besides, the usage of memory is also not efficient because the decoding process needs too much hardware resources to store the temp results, requiring large circuit areas and taking a lot of system time. To solve these problems, we proposed a new and efficient decoding algorithm for QC-LDPC codes. Comparing with the traditional OMS algorithm, the new algorithm has higher speed, lower complexity and smaller resources consumption.
We present two simplified versions to simplify the node updating process and messages storing process of the traditional OMS algorithm. The advantage of these simplification are obvious because the simplified algorithm can nearly double the decoding speed and reduce more than 50% memory consumption of the offset min-sum algorithm [5].
* Corresponding Author

On account of fully-parallel LDPC decoder designs [6] suffering from complex interconnect issues, semi-parallel [7] [8] architecture based on QC-LDPC codes is introduced. Semiparallel architecture takes more time to decode the codeword and the throughput is lower than a fully architecture, but the its interconnect complexity is much lower and the convergence rate is higher, which is very suitable for hardware implementation [9] [10]. By combining the simplifications with semi-parallel architecture, we get a new and efficient decoding algorithm in terms of decoding speed, interconnect complexity and memory consumption. From a practical perspective, we also designed an effective FPGA implementation scheme for our algorithm, includes the design architecture of decoder, decoding operation and pipeline optimization and the scheme can be directly used by engineers and practitioners in the communication area. We apply the multi code rate QC-LDPC codes used in 802.11.n to the hardware decoding architecture and analyze the results from three aspects: bit error performance, resources consumption and throughput. The result shows that the new decoder algorithm has low consumption of the hardware resources, high convergence rate and high throughput.
This paper is organized as follows: SectionⅡ introduces QC-LDPC codes and the traditional offset min-sum decoding algorithm for LDPC codes. Section Ⅲ presents the efficient algorithm we proposed includes the two simplified versions and semi-parallel architecture for QC-LDPC codes. SectionⅣ shows the FPGA implementation scheme for the efficient algorithm. Discussion and results are given in Section Ⅴ . Section Ⅵ concludes the paper.
II. QUASI CYCLIC LDPC CODES AND MIN-SUM DECODING ALGORITHM
A. Quasi Cyclic LDPC Codes Quasi Cyclic LDPC Codes (QC-LDPC) is a special class of
LDPC codes and it can provide flexibility and low encoding and decoding complexity [7].The check matrix of QC-LDPC code is composed of the same style of blocks with different cyclic shifts, which allows structured decoder and reduces decoder implementation complexity [8] [9]. As is shown below, the base check matrix H for QC-LDPC code is defined by a matrix of Mb by Nb , where Mb is the number of block rows and Nb is the number of block columns in the base matrix. The element Pi,j is one of a set of z by z cyclically right shifted

246

978-1-4799-5970-9 © 2014 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

identity matrices and Pi,j represents the shift value for the z by z identity matrix.

 P1,1

H



   

P2,1 

P1,2 P2,2

 

P1,Nb P2,Nb

  





 

PMb ,1 PMb ,2  PMb ,Nb 

B. Offset Min-SumDecoding Algorithm For hardware implementation of QC-LDPC, the reliability
messages used in belief propagation (BP)-based offset min-sum algorithm are often used [3]. The standard offset min-sum algorithm for decoding LDPC is a parallel and iterative soft decoding algorithm. In each iteration, the updating process of message from the variable node to the check node is called the horizontal scan and the process of message from the check node to the variable node is called the vertical scan. After each iteration, the a-posteriori probability for each bit is computed. At last a hard decoding decision is made for each bit based on the probability.

In the iteration k, let Pn(k) be the posteriori LLR for the input
data bit n. Let Qm(kn) denote the message sent from variable node
n to check node m. Let Rm(kn) denote the message from check node m to variable node n. M (n) is the set of the neighboring
check nodes for variable node n, and N(m) is the set of the
neighboring variable nodes for check node m. LLRn is the initial Log-likelihood ratio for input bit n. For an additive White Gaussian noise channel, let yn be the received data bit at position n, LLRn can be described as:

LLRn



log

 



p(xn p(xn

0/ 1/

yn ) yn )

, 

{n 1,, N}

The detailed decoding process of offset min-sum algorithm is given as follows:

Initialization: For n {1, 2, N},

Qm(0n)  Pn(0)  LLRn , Rm(0n)  0.

(1)

Iteration:

1) Horizontal scan (check node update rule):

For each m and n  N (m) ,

 Rm(kn)



  n'N(m)\n

sign(Qn(k'm1)

) 



maxn'mN(imn)\n

|

Qn(k'm1)

|

 (k),0 

(2)

k is the current iteration number, and  (k ) is the offset factor.

2) Vertical scan(variable node update rule)

 Qn(mk)  fn 

Rm( k' )n

(3)

m 'M (n)\m

 Pn(k)  Pn(0) 

Rm(kn)

(4)

mM (n)

3) Decoding: if Pn(k)  0; xˆn(k)  0 , otherwise xˆn(k)  1 . If
xˆH T  0 or the iteration number exceeds the limits,
stop the iteration and output xˆn(k) as the decoded codeword.

Although the calculation complexity has been simplified, the offset min-sum algorithm still has some problems. Firstly the update process need two scans, which lead to lots of time delay for the decoder. Besides, the messages storing process is also inefficient cause the decoder needs too much memory
resource to store the temp messages Rm(kn) and Qm(kn) in each iteration.

III. THE EFFICIENT DECODING ALGORITHM FOR QC-LDPC
CODES
As there are some problems we mentioned for OMS algorithm, we proposed a new kind of efficient decoding Algorithm based on Min-Sum algorithm. The new algorithm simplifies the updating process and messages storing process of decoding and introduces the semi-parallel architecture for layer decoding. The specific changes about our algorithm are described as follows.

A. Simplification for the updating process of offset Min-Sum （OMS）Algorithm
Observing the vertical scan for OMS algorithm, we can get the equation below from (3) and (4).

Qn(mk )  Pn(k)  Rm(kn)

(5)

Equation (5) shows the variable node message Qn(mk) can be
obtained from the check node message Rm(kn) and posteriori
LLR Pn(k) . Hence, we can merge the horizon scan and the vertical scan into a single horizontal scan where the check node updating message Rm(kn) can be computed directly from Pn(k1)
and Rm(kn1) . After each iteration, we only need to store the
updating message Rm(kn) and Pn(k) , which can be obtained by the
accumulation of Rm(kn) . In this way, the algorithm can not only speed up the decoding process but also save much memory resources by storing Pn(k) , which is N items, instead of Qm(kn) , which of N dv (average variable node degree) items.

B. Simplification for the memory storing process of offset Min-Sum Algorithm
The traditional min-sum algorithm uses much memory for the storing the check node message Rm(kn) , which could take a significant amount of memory resource. Our simplification

247 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

comes from the following observation of the check node message Rm(kn) computed at the horizontal scan in (2). For the same check node m, all have the same absolute value except one. The first absolute value is the minimal absolute value of | Rm(kn) | . The second absolute value is the second minimal
absolute value of | Rm(kn) | . Based on this, we offered a simplified scheme to cut down the memory usage further.

To be more specific, for the check node message Rm(kn) of the same check node m, let Am(k) be the first minimal absolute value of Rm(kn) ,

Am(k )



min |
nN (m)

Rm(kn)

|.

Let Bm(k) be the second minimal absolute value,

Bm(k )



max
nN (m)

|

Rm(kn)

|.

Let nm(k) be the position of the first minimal absolute value Am(k) ,

nm(k )



arg min nN (m)

|

Rm(kn)

|.

Hence,

for

the

check

node

messages

R(k) mn

of

the

same

check

node, we only need to store the two absolute values, the

position of the first one, and the signs of Rm(kn) to save the circuit

memory. The check node message Rm(kn) can be recovered as

Rm(kn)  sm(kn)  f ( Am(k) , Bm(k) , n, nm(k) )

(6)

In the above equation, sm(kn) represents the sign of Rm(kn) , and the function f ( A, B, n, n) can be defined as

f

(

A,

B,

n,

n )



B,

 

A,

n  n otherwise

(7)

C. Semi-parallel architecture for Min-Sum algorithm
On account of the high interconnect-complexity for full parallel decoding architecture, the semi-parallel decoding architecture is introduced especially for QC-LDPC codes [7]. For QC-LDPC with the base H matrix of Mb  Nb , the Mb block rows can be viewed as concatenation of M b layers. In this Architecture, after the check-node updating process is finished for one block row (one layer), and the message is immediately used to update the variable nodes, whose results are then provided for the processing the next block row of check nodes [9] [10]. Hence this architecture is also called layer decoding architecture. Lay-decoding differs from the parallel architecture of Min-Sum Algorithms, where all check nodes are processed first and then the variable-node message will be computed. In layer decoding architecture, an iteration of decoder is

composed by M b sub-iterations. The variable-node message passed serially in different block rows which can increase the convergence rate of decoding. And the interconnect complexity is much lower than full parallel architecture for the processing parallelization only depending on the block size of H matrix, instead of the whole numbers of check nodes.

Combining the three optimizing steps mentioned above, we can get the efficient decode algorithm named Single-Scan Layer Decoding Algorithm (SLD). The calculate process of SLD is the Single-Scan simplification to decrease the memory circuit area and decoding delay. And decoding architecture of SLD is Layer Decoding to increase the convergence rate of decoder. The whole process of SLD can be described:

Initialization: For nb {1, 2, Nb},

Am(0b)

 Bm(0b)

 nm(0b)



0,

sm(0b

) nb

 1, Qn(b0)

  LLRnb

(8)

Iteration: k  1, 2, , i, (Iteration loop)

1) Horizontal scan(check node update rule)

mb  1, 2,, Mb , （Sub-iteration loop）

nb  1, 2,, Nb , （Block column loop）

Rm( kb nb1)



sm( kb

1) nb



f

(

A (mkb1)

,

 B

(k 1) mb

,

n

,

nm(kb

1)

),

[Q (mkb),nb ]S (mb ,nb )



 [ Pnb

]S

( mb

,nb

)

 Rm(kb,n1b) ,

Rm(kb)nb  F ([Qm(kb),nb ' ]S (mb ,nb ') , nb '  N (mb ) \ nb ),

 [ Pnb

]S (mb

,nb

)

 [Qm(kb)nb ]S (mb ,nb )

 [Rm(kb)nb ],

(9) (10) (11) (12)

A (mkb)

 B

(k) mb

 

nnmbmNaN(ixm(nm)b|)R|R(mkb(m)nkbb)nb|, |,

nm(kb)



arg

max
nN (m)

|

 R

(k ) mb nb

|,

sm(kb

) nb



sgn(

 R

(k) mb nb

).

(13)

2) Decoding: if Pn(k)  0; xˆn(k)  0 ,otherwise xˆn(k)  1.

Where

the

vectors

R m( kb

) nb

and

Q m( kb

) nb

represent

all

the

R

and

Q

messages in each none-zero block of H matrix, S(mb , nb )

denotes the zero block vector Qm(kb),nb

shift coefficient for the

of

the

H

matrix.

[Q m( kb

) ,

mbth nb ]S

block
(mb ,nb )

row and denotes

nbth nonthat the

is cyclically shifted up by the amount S(mb , nb ) . A

negative sign on S(mb , nb ) indicates that it is cyclic down

shift. F () denotes the check-node processing, which is defined

in (2).

248 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Rold

Pshift

Qshift

CHT P

Pnew

Delayed Qshift

Pnsehwift

Rnew

Rnew sign Rnew Values

n

Figure 1 data flow process of the decode operation in FPGA
IV. THE EFFICIENT FPGA IMPLEMENTATION FOR LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE
A. Architecture Description The hardware implementation in FPGA for SLD algorithm
is introduced and the implementation scheme is suitable for QC-LDPC codes with multi code rate and different code length. For ease of discussion, we illustrate the architecture for the specific structured multi-rate LDPC code used in 802.11.n. The code length is 648 and the block size of the base H matrix is Z=27. Assume the parallelization is M=Z=27 and the quantization bits for the message calculated during the decoding process is b=7bits.
B. Decode Operation The whole data flow process of the decoder is demonstrated
in Fig.1. The initial LLR of channel and probability message P is stored into a buffer RAM. R Sign memory and R values memory are respectively used to store the signs and absolute values, constituted of (A, B, n ) for check-node message. The parallel Check Nodes Unit (CNU) is the CNU arrays with M CNUs for updating the R messages parallel of a block. Fig.2.

Figure 2 CNU process architecture for the implementation
shows the detailed process of CNU. There are mainly two states for CNU processing A_B finder state, R calculate state. In the first state, the CNU mainly find the minimum and the second minimum absolute values (A and B) of the variablenode message Q, and then stored A, B and the index of A into the temp registers. In the second state, CNU firstly modifies the absolute values with offset and gets the updated values of A, B and the index of A, which are passed to the R values memory for storing. At the same time, CNU calculates the new R message and pass it to next process for updating P message.
To achieve high speed, the two-stage pipeline is designed in the decode architecture, demonstrated in Fig.3. And the whole operations of the decoder are finished in a time division multiplexed fashion. Shown from the Figure, The operation process is divided into several sections. After a section has been finished, the decoder will continuously process the same section for next block to ensure all the modules work simultaneously. In some cases, for some independent sections during a block process, we design two-stage pipelines to process the independent sections parallel, which can increase the decoding speed. As a whole, the operation process is described as follows: Firstly, the decoder gets out the P message from the buffer ram. Then cyclic shifting for P and the

Figure 3 Two-stage pipeline of the decoder architecture
249 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

calculating for Rold used in (10) are finished parallel with two pipelines. After the operation in (10), the variable node messages Q are calculated as the input of CNU arrays for calculating the updating check-node message Rnew in (11), while simultaneously writing into the FIFO for the usage in (12). In
the end, the decoder updates the probability messages Pshift in (12) and stores the R values into the memory in (13) simultaneously.

clock cycles required to process a layer and it can be given by CCL  kmax  7 where kmax is the maximum check node degree of the chosen base H matrix.
For Multi-rate LDPC code with code length=648, when the clock frequency of decoder is 200MHz and the iteration number is 10, the effective information data throughput can be 104Mbps,134Mbps,162Mbps for 1/2, 2/3, 3/4 code-rate LDPC code.

V. DISCUSSION AND RESULTS
A. Performance Results analysis Fig.4 shows the performance curves of the two algorithms
(OMS and SLD) with different iteration numbers on the additional white noise (AWGN) channel. From the figure, we can get the result that the iteration numbers of SLD is almost only the half of OMS for the same BER (bit error rate) performance, proving that the SLD can get a higher convergence rate than OMS. Besides, SLD can save nearly a half of memory resources for the process simplifications we mentioned.
Fig.5 gives the performance comparison of different code rate (1/2, 2/3, 3/4) between software (Visual Studio) float-point platform and FPGA fixed-point platform. And the result shows that the degradations in FPGA fixed-point platform with 7bits uniform quantization are all less than 0.1dB, which also proves the feasibility for our hardware implementation.
B Resources Consumption and Throughput Results Analysis Table I gives the FPGA implementation results of SLD
algorithm, including resources consumption and maximum clock frequency. By practical circuit test, we can get the result: when the clock frequency is 200MHz, the decoder we designed can work well.

TABLE I FPGA IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF THE MULTI-RATE
DECODER

(Devices, Altera Stratix IV EP4SGX530)

Code Rate
Combinational ALUTS
Logic Registers
Block memory bits Maximum Clock
Frequency

1/2
8772
4895 18657
208MHz

Used 2/3
8243
4789 17253
216MHz

3/4
7842
4581 18249
234MHz

The throughput of the decoder is given by the equation as follows:

Throughput= L  R  fclock

(15)

CCL  Nb  iternum

Where L denotes the LDPC code length; R denotes the LDPC code rate; fclock denotes the clock frequency of the decoder; Nb is the block rows of the base H matrix; iternum is the iteration numbers of decoder; CCL stands for number of

SLD VS OMS,AWGN-BPSK 10-2

SLD-10iteration

SLD-15iteration

10-3

SLD-20iteration OMS-15iteration

OMS-20iteration

OMS-30iteration

10-4

BE R

10-5

10-6

10-7 1.8 1.9 2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 Eb/N0
Figure 4 BER Comparison of SLD and OMS with different iterations, (324,648,1/2), AWGN channel, BPSK modulation

iterations=10,code length =648,BPSK-AWGN 10-2
rate=1/2 fixed-point

rate=1/2 float-point

rate=2/3 fixed-point

10-3

rate=2/3 float-point

rate=3/4 fixed-point

rate=3/4 float-point

10-4

BER

10-5

10-6

10-7

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/N0

Figure 5 BER Comparison for 11.n QC-LDPC Codes with 1/2, 2/3, 3/4 in float-point sofware platform and fixed-point FPGA platform

VI. CONCLUSION This paper presents a new and efficient decoding architecture named (SLD) for QC-LDPC codes. SLD algorithm simplifies the updating and data storing process of offset minsum algorithm, which can speed up the decoding speed and save up nearly a half of memory resources. Moreover, by using semi-parallel architecture, the new SLD algorithm can get the

250 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

same BER with only half of the iteration numbers needed by OMS algorithm. And the inter-connect complexity is also lower than that of OMS. We also implemented our algorithm in FPGA for the multi-rate QC-LDPC used in 802.11.n and the result shows the feasibility and high throughput of the FPGA implementation scheme we proposed.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work is sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61171101) and the National Science and Technology Major Project (2012ZX03004004-001, 2013ZX03003016) of P.R. China.
REFERENCES
[1] Fossorier, Marc PC, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.50, no.8, pp 1788-1793, April 1955.
[2] Chen, Jinghu, and Marc PC Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol.6, no.5, 2002, pp 208-210.
[3] Guilloud, Frederic, “Generic architecture for LDPC codes decoding,” ENST Paris, Ph. D Thesis, 2004.

[4] Huang X, “Single-scan min-sum algorithms for fast decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, 2006. pp140-143.
[5] Karkooti, Marjan, and Joseph R. Cavallaro, “Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Information Technology Coding and Computing, 2004, pp.579585.
[6] Gunnam K K, Choi G S, Yeary M B, et al, “VLSI architectures for layered decoding for irregular LDPC codes of WiMax Communications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, 2007, pp.4542-4547.
[7] Kim S, Sobelman G E, Lee H, “A reduced-complexity architecture for LDPC layered decoding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol.19, no.8, pp.1099-1103, June 2011.
[8] Sun Y, Cavallaro J R, “VlSI architecture for layered decoding of qc-ldpc codes with high circulant weight,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol.21, no.10, pp.1960-1964.
[9] Hariri, Al, et al, "A high throughput configurable parallel encoder architecture for Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," in Proc. IEEE 19th International On-Line Testing Symposium (IOLTS), 2013, pp.163-166.
[10] Sham, Chiu-Wing, et al, "A 2.0 Gb/s Throughput Decoder for QC-LDPC Convolutional Codes," IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol.60, no.7, pp. 1857-1869, July 2013.

Identify applicable sponsor/s here. (sponsors)
Identify applicable sponsor/s here. (sponsors) 251
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

