IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

1283

Fast and Accurate Error Floor Estimation of Quantized Iterative Decoders for Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
Sina Tolouei, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, we propose a fast and accurate technique to estimate the error floor of variable-regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under quantized iterative decoding algorithms. The technique, which is based on enumerating the dominant elementary trapping sets of the code, provides significant improvement over existing methods in terms of speed and accuracy.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, quantized iterative decoders, error floor, error floor estimation, trapping sets, elementary trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE fast and accurate estimation of the error floor of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under iterative message-passing decoding algorithms [1]–[5] is of great interest in applications requiring very low error rates such as optical communications and storage devices. In practice, the channel output is quantized and the decoders are implemented in fixedpoint arithmetic. Recently, in [5], an error floor estimation method for quantized symmetric iterative decoders of LDPC codes over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel was proposed. It was assumed that the all-zero codeword was transmitted and the method was devised based on the enumeration and the examination of certain input vectors with
small Euclidean distance to the most reliable vector R (the vector with the largest positive quantized value Q = 2q−1 − 1 in all coordinates). The input vectors were generated using a technique called modified cycle enumeration, where the error locations (coordinates with values less than Q) belonged to the set Tk consisting of the variable sets of all the cycles of length g, . . . , g + 2k in the Tanner graph of the code, with g being the girth of the Tanner graph. In modified cycle enumeration, the error patterns (coordinate values of error locations) were selected in the increasing order of their distance to R. The generated input vectors were then applied to the iterative decoder under consideration and the error floor was estimated based on those input vectors that failed the decoder. Such input vectors were categorized in the sets E˜d, d = d˜m, . . ., where E˜d and d˜m were estimates for the set of input vectors at distance d from R that failed the decoder and the minimum distance of the failed input vectors to R, respectively. The estimate for the error floor was obtained based on sets E˜d.
Manuscript received April 3, 2014; revised May 17, 2014; accepted June 4, 2014. Date of publication June 16, 2014; date of current version August 8, 2014. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was G. Liva. The financial support for this work has been provided in part by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: stolouei@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2014.2331070

Although the method of [5] was demonstrated to be very effective for short LDPC codes with variable degree 3, its application to block lengths larger than about 1000 and variable degrees larger than 3 is hampered by large computational complexity (see Section IV of [5]). In particular, to render an accurate estimate for the error floor of LDPC codes with larger variable degrees, larger values of k for the set Tk need to be selected. This in turn increases the size |Tk| of Tk and consequently the complexity of the method. For example, for a randomly constructed regular code with g = 6 and variableand check-node degrees of 5 and 10, respectively, increasing k from 1 to 2, will increase |Tk| from about 218,000 by a factor of about 29 to about 6.3 × 106 [6]. For q = 3, this corresponds to increasing the number of test input vectors by a factor of roughly 200 from about 5 × 108 to about 1011. This is while, based on our results, to obtain an accurate estimate, one may still need to increase k even further. In this letter, we address this issue by modifying the way that the error locations are selected.1 Instead of using the set Tk, we use a different set denoted by TA,B which consists of all the (a, b) elementary trapping sets (ETS) [1], [7] of size a less than or equal to A, where for each a, we use the ETSs with the value b in the range of b(mai)n ≤ b ≤ B with bm (ai)n being the smallest b for (a, b) ETSs with a given a. We demonstrate that using the new set with the proper choice of A and B, the total number of test input vectors that are required to provide an accurate estimate of the error floor reduces substantially compared to the modified cycle enumeration technique of [5]. We also demonstrate that using only the absorbing sets [4] (rather than all ETSs) does not provide an accurate estimate of the error floor.
II. CHANNEL MODEL, DECODING ALGORITHM, AND PROPOSED SCHEME
In the rest of the letter, we make similar assumptions and use similar notations to those in [5]. In particular, we consider the transmission of bits using binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation over the AWGN channel with coherent detection. Following [5], we also consider the application of a q-bit uniform quantization scheme in the range [−Cth, Cth] to the channel outputs. For the decoding algorithm, although our method is applicable to any symmetric decoding algorithm, similar to [5], we focus on quantized min-sum (MS) algorithm in the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain.
For the error floor estimation, we follow the general approach of Algorithm 1 in [5], known as “modified cycle enumeration.” The main change that we make is the replacement of the set Tk with the set TA,B, described in the previous section.
1It is important to note that our work in this letter is focused only on the way that error locations are selected. We thus make no change in the approach of [5] for generating the error patterns or the technique used in [5] for the estimation of error floor.

1089-7798 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t8s:/0in6d:5e5x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

1284

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

Fig. 1. Normal graphs of three non-LSS ETS structures in a Tanner graph with variable degree 4 and girth 6.

Correspondingly, we refer to the new algorithm, which is de- presented in Fig. 1. The structures are shown by their normal scribed in Algorithm 1, as “ETS enumeration.” The list P LA,B graph in Fig. 1.2 Fig. 1(a) is the normal graph of a (7, 8) ETS
at the input of the algorithm contains error patterns correspond- which consists of two LSS ETSs (3,6) and (5,6) sharing a

ing to the elements in the set TA,B in increasing order of the
distance to R, and DA,B is the list of distances corresponding to the error patterns in P LA,B. Algorithm 1 continues with testing input vectors up until the distance d of the tested error patterns is large enough to satisfy d2 > dm 2 + β, where dm is the minimum distance of error patterns that failed the decoder, and β is
a constant selected to provide an accurate estimate, as will be
discussed in Section III. To generate the error rate estimate in
Step 5 of Algorithm 1, we only use the first term in Equation (6) of [5]. As discussed in [5], the second term, P (Sd>dth ), which denotes the probability of input vectors whose Euclidean
distance to R is larger than a certain threshold dth, mainly contributes to the accuracy of the estimate in the waterfall
region, and has negligible effect in the error floor region.

variable-node. Fig. 1(b) is the normal graph of an (8,6) ETS which consists of two LSS ETSs (3,6) and (5,2) connected by a check-node, and Fig. 1(c) is the normal graph of an (8,10) ETS which consists of two LSS ETSs (3,6) and (4,4) connected by two check-nodes and one variable-node. Knowing all the structures of non-LSS (a, b) ETSs in the range of a and b values of interest, we then identify their constituent LSS structures and search the graph for those constituent LSS structures that are so connected to create the non-LSS structures (through a shared variable-node, a single check-node or two check-nodes and a variable-node).
To compare the complexity of our technique with that of modified cycle enumeration, we mainly focus on the number of input vectors that need to be tested to obtain the error estimates in each case. This is the same as the number of iter-

Algorithm 1: ETS Enumeration

ative decoding instances that are required for the derivation of each estimate, and accounts for the majority of computational

1: Create TA,B, P LA,B and DA,B. 2: d = min{x : x ∈ DA,B}, dm = ∞.
3: Decode all patterns in P LA,B of distance d to R and corresponding to locations in TA,B.
4: If there are patterns that cannot be correctly decoded, dm = min{d, dm} and update set E˜d.
5: If dm = ∞ or d2 < dm 2 + β, then d = the next larger distance in DA,B, and go to step 3; else, stop and generate the error rate estimate.

complexity.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We have applied our method of selecting the error locations along with the general estimation method of [5] to a large number of variable-regular LDPC codes. In this section, however, we only report our results for three randomly constructed codes. We focus on random codes here because they have a large variety of TSs compared to structured codes and are thus

more difficult to analyze. The block length n and dimension

To generate the set TA,B for a given code, we mainly rely on [7] which characterizes the (a, b) ETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes with relatively small values of a and b. Based on the results presented in [7], we are able to efficiently find all the ETSs in the ranges of a and b that are of interest in this work.
In [7], it is proved that the vast majority of (a, b) ETS structures with small values of a and b are layered supersets (LSS) of short cycles, in the sense that for each such structure there is a nested sequence of ETSs that starts from a short cycle and grows, one variable node at a time, to generate the structure. Associated with the LSS property, there is an efficient search algorithm (Algorithm 1 of [7]) that starts from the short cycles of the graph and can find all ETSs with LSS property in a guaranteed fashion. For ETSs with LSS property, we thus use Algorithm 1 of [7] to find them. For the few ETS structures that are not LSS of any cycles, we carefully examine their structures.

k of the codes are: (n, k) = (1008, 504), (8000, 4000), (816, 408). We refer to these codes as C1, C2, and C3, respectively. The codes C1 and C2 have variable-node and check-node degrees of dv = 4 and dc = 8, respectively, and are obtained from [5] and [8], respectively. Code C3 is taken from [8] and has dv = 5 and dc = 10. All three codes have a girth of g = 6. For C1, following [5], we use Cth = 1.8 and Imax = 50, where Imax is the maximum number of iterations for the MS algorithm. For C2 and C3, we use Cth = 1.2 and Imax = 30. In general, clipping thresholds Cth are selected to minimize the frame error rate (FER) in the waterfall region [9]. For all simulations, the number of quantization bits q is chosen to be 3. For larger
number of quantization bits, the results for smaller values of q (say q = 3), obtained by the technique presented here, can
be used as the input to Algorithm 2 of [5] to efficiently and
accurately estimate the error floor.

Our study shows that all such ETS structures are composed of two ETSs with LSS structure sharing a variable-node, or connected by either one check-node or a chain consisting of two check-nodes and one variable-node. An example of each structure for a code with variable degree 4 and girth 6 is

2The normal graph of an ETS in a variable-regular Tanner graph is obtained from the induced subgraph of the ETS in the Tanner graph by removing all the check nodes of the subgraph: for degree-one check nodes, the node and its adjacent edge are removed; for degree-two check nodes, the node and its two adjacent edges are replaced with an edge [7].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:06:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TOLOUEI AND BANIHASHEMI: FAST AND ACCURATE ERROR FLOOR ESTIMATION OF QUANTIZED ITERATIVE DECODERS TABLE I
(a, bm (ai)n) ETS CLASSES WITH a ≤ 10 AND THEIR MULTIPLICITY FOR C1 − C3

1285

Our study indicates that, for all three codes, A = 10 is

large enough to cover the range of all ETS classes with non-

negligible effect on the error floor. Thus, we first find all the (a, b) ETSs with a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 10. We then investigate the Fig. 2. Simulation and estimation results of C1 decoded by 3-bit MS effect of different classes of ETSs on the error floor. Our results (Cth = 1.8 and Imax = 50).

in general indicate that for each value of a, one only needs to

include the class of (a, b(mai)n) in the error floor estimation to obtain a good estimate. We denote the set of all (a, b) ETSs

with a ≤ A and b = bm (ai)n for each a in this range by TA,bmin . The list of such ETS classes and their multiplicity for A = 10

are provided in Table I for the three codes. The last row of the

table shows the total number of (a, bm (ai)n) ETSs with a ≤ 10, which is the same as |T10,bmin |, for each code.
From Table I, one can see the random nature of the existing

ETSs and their multiplicity for the three codes. Comparing the

results for C1 and C2, we can see that increasing the block length in general increases b(mai)n. This would in turn translate to an improved error floor. The comparison of the results for C1 and
C3 demonstrates a similar trend when the variable- and check-

node degrees are increased.

Fig. 3. Simulation and estimation results of C2 decoded by 3-bit MS

We note that while within each ETS class of each code, there (Cth = 1.2 and Imax = 30).

may exist a number of different non-isomorphic structures,3

the study of such structures and their relative harmfulness is beyond the scope of this work. Instead, we would like to focus on the fact that despite the variety of non-isomorphic structures within each class, the total number of (a, bm (ai)n) ETSs with a ≤ 10 for each code (the last row of the table) is relatively small. In addition, a more careful inspection of the structures in Table I reveals that, for each code, many of the smaller ETSs are subsets of larger ones, and thus can be removed from the set T10,bmin since their contributions will be accounted for through their supersets. Taking this into account, the size of T10,bmin can be further reduced to 1130, 2520 and 7286, for the three codes, respectively.
In Figs. 2–4, we have provided the error floor estimates obtained using our technique and based on the ETSs listed in Table I. Through the estimation process, if the minimum
Euclidean distance from R of error patterns that fail the decoder are found to be d˜m, to obtain the estimates, we generate and test

error patterns with distances up to d˜m 2 + 10 from R. Increasing the range of distances beyond this value will have negligible effect on improving the estimates. In Figs. 2–4, for comparison, we have also included the Monte Carlo simulation results. To demonstrate the convergence behavior of the estimates as larger ETSs are included, for each code, we have plotted the estimates based on TA,bmin for A = 5, . . . , 10. As can be seen, the estimates improve and demonstrate a convergence behavior as larger ETSs are included. For all codes, the estimate based on T10,bmin closely matches the Monte Carlo simulation.
It is important to note that for the modified cycle enumeration technique to provide an estimate with similar accuracy as those presented here, a much larger number of input vectors need to be tested. For C1, to obtain an estimate as accurate as ours using modified cycle enumeration, one needs to use cycles of length 6, 8, and 10. The number of such cycles in C1, which is the same as |T2|, is 434,317. This corresponds to about 7 × 109 input test

3Two graphical structures G1 and G2 with undirected edges and node sets V1 and V2, respectively, are isomorphic if there is a bijection f : V1 → V2 such that nodes v1, v2 ∈ V1 are joined by an edge if and only if f (v1) and f (v2) are joined by an edge.

vectors. For our method, on the other hand, the number of test vectors based on the ETSs of Table I is only about 109 which is less than what is required for modified cycle enumeration by a factor of 7. For comparison, the estimate obtained by the modified cycle enumeration using T2 is also given in Fig. 2. As

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:06:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1286

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 8, AUGUST 2014

As another experiment, we obtained all the ETSs of the three codes that are also absorbing sets. For C1, among all the ETSs listed in Table I, only two are absorbing sets: the only (6, 4) ETS and one of the five (9,6) ETSs. For C2, none of the ETSs in Table I is an absobrbing set. Finally, for C3, out of 8021 ETSs of Table I, only 69 are absorbing sets: 30 × (4,8), 35 × (5,9), 1 × (6,8), 1 × (7,9), 1 × (8,8), 1 × (10,10). The estimation results based on the absorbing sets for C1 and C3 are presented in Figs. 2, and 4, respectively. As can be seen, none of the estimates is very accurate. For C2, no estimation can be made as none of the ETSs in Table I is an absorbing set.

Fig. 4. Simulation and estimation results of C3 decoded by 3-bit MS (Cth = 1.2 and Imax = 30).

can find

btheeseseanm,etheisstiemstaimtead˜temis=ve√ry91c.lose

to

ours.

Both

techniques

For C2, using modified cycle enumeration with T2 results in a

very poor estimate of the error floor. Even by enlargening the set

of error locations to T3, still the estimate is rather far from the
Monte Carlo simulations. This can be seen in Fig. 3. Note that |T3| for C2 is about 7.6 × 106 and the corresponding number of input test vectors is about 8.4 × 1011. In comparison, the

number of input test vectors for our scheme is about 1.2 × 1010

which is less than that of modified cycle enumeration by a factor of about 70. For this code, d˜m√for our sc√heme and modified cycle enumeration with T3 is 179 and 205, respectively. So the modified cycle enumeration misses some of the most

dominant error patterns, and thus results in a poor estimate of

the error floor. (Note that for C2, using T4 in modified cycle

enumeration is practically infeasible since the number of cycles

of length 14 in the Tanner graph of C2 is more than 109.) Similar to C2, the error floor of C3 is also out of the reach

of modified cycle enumeration. The estimate obtained using

T2 (consisting of cycles of length 6, 8, and 10) is reported

in Fig. 4. a√bout 50.

As The

can be seen, this estimate estimated value d˜m in this

is off by√a factor of case is 145 versus

130 obtained by our technique. Note that |T2| for this code is

about 6.3 × 106, and for the implementation of modified cycle

enumeration about 1011 input vectors need to be tested. For our scheme, on the other hand, only about 1.2 × 109 input test

vectors are required, more than a factor of 83 less than what

is required by modified cycle enumeration. (Note that for C3,
using T3 in modified cycle enumeration is practically infeasible as the number of cycles of length 12 in the Tanner graph of C3 is more than 109.)

It is worth noting that using a desktop computer with an Intel

Xeon 2.27 GHz CPU and 2 GB memory, the ETS enumeration

(Algorithm 1) implemented in C language took about 7, 112,

and 13 hours to obtain the estimates presented in Figs. 2–4, respectively.4

IV. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we presented a fast and accurate technique for the error floor estimation of variable-regular LDPC codes. Our technique addresses the main limitation of the error floor method of [5] as quoted from Section IV of [5]: “It is of great practical interest to find more efficient and accurate methods of estimating the sets Ed for small values of d, particularly for larger block lengths, and codes with larger variable degrees or with highly irregular degree distributions.” Although, our results here are limited to variable-regular codes, they do extend the reach of the estimation method of [5] to larger block lengths and larger variable degrees by significantly improving the speed and the accuracy in comparison with the modified cycle enumeration of [5].
In addition, based on the results of this work, we established that ETSs are the relevant graphical structures in the error floor region of LDPC codes (at least variable-regular ones). On the other hand, our examples demonstrated that, in general, absorbing sets alone do not provide an accurate estimate of the error floor of randomly constructed LDPC codes.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[2] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0605051
[3] E. Cavus, C. Haymes, and B. Daneshrad, “An IS simulation technique for very low BER performance evaluation of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1095–1100.
[4] L. Dolecek et al., “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: Deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, Aug. 2009.
[5] H. Xiao, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Karimi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes decoded by quantized soft-decision iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 474–484, Feb. 2013.
[6] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Message-passing algorithms for counting short cycles in a graph,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 485–495, Feb. 2013.
[7] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes. [Online]. Available: http:// arxiv.org/abs/1308.1259
[8] [Online]. http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes [9] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of
min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.

4The running times are based on testing only the error patterns that have at least one negative coordinate. This change, which was also implemented in [5], has negligible effect on the accuracy of estimates.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:06:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

