2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

A unified approach to optimization of LDPC codes for various communication scenarios

Irina E. Bocharova1, Rolf Johannesson2, and Boris D. Kudryashov1

1 Dept. of Information Systems St. Petersburg Univ. of Information Technologies,
Mechanics and Optics St. Petersburg 197101, Russia Email: {irina, boris}@eit.lth.se

2 Dept. of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University
P. O. Box 118, SE-22100 Lund, Sweden Email: rolf@eit.lth.se

Abstract—A unified approach to construct and optimize codes determined by their sparse parity-check matrices is presented. Parity-check matrices of quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC block codes are obtained by replacing the nonzero elements of a base (seed) matrix by circulants. Replacing the nonzero elements either by companion matrices of elements from a finite field GF(2m) or by a formal variable D gives parity-check matrices of binary images of nonbinary LDPC block codes and LDPC convolutional codes, respectively. A set of performance measures applicable to different classes of LDPC codes are considered and a greedy algorithm for code performance optimization is presented. For a few classes of LDPC codes examples of codes combining good error-correcting performance with compact representation are obtained.
Moreover, a specific channel model can easily be embedded into the optimization loop. Thereby, the code can be optimized for a specific channel. The efficiency of such an optimization is demonstrated via an example of Faster Than Nyquist (FTN) signaling using LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Starting with their rediscovery in 1995 low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes have got a lot of attention due to their near Shannon limit performance. Currently, a few classes of LDPC codes are considered practical in terms of implementation complexity and they are often referred to as candidates for different applications. Not all but many of these codes can be interpreted as long codes derived from short codes via some kind of “lifting” or “graph covering” procedure. To construct a parity-check matrix of a long code, first, we take a binary matrix called base or seed matrix (protograph) and then we replace its nonzero elements by some other matrices. Such a two-stage construction helps a lot in simplifying the code search, the code description, as well as the encoding and decoding implementations.
An important combinatorial parameter of an iteratively decodable code is the girth of the corresponding Tanner graph [1]. For an LDPC code to perform well under iterative decoding, cycles of length 4 in its Tanner graph should be avoided. An algebraic approach to the construction of such (binary and nonbinary) codes is explored in [2], and examples of efficient codes are presented.
The progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm having the girth as the target parameter leads to efficient non-structured codes with a given degree distribution [3]. Involving more parameters, in particular, the approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) [4], [5] allows us to reduce the error floor

of the frame (bit) error rate (FER (BER)) performance at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) compared to the original PEG algorithm.
If we are using the two-stage (or multistage) code construction, we first have to decide about column and row degree distributions of the base parity-check matrix. Examples of almost capacity-achieving degree distributions (DD) are presented in [6]. These DDs are computed without taking into account any cycles in the code Tanner graph and, therefore, they are suitable only for constructing infinitely long asymptotically optimal codes. In particular, in [2] it is noted that if the code to be constructed is short, the DD obtained via the density evolution technique would be far from optimal and require some adjustment in order to lower the error floors.
In this paper, we address the problem of combinatorial optimization of LDPC codes obtained via the above mentioned two-stage procedure.
Let n and R denote the length and rate of a QC LDPC block code, respectively. Assume that n and R are fixed and we are searching for QC LDPC block codes minimizing the error probability for belief propagation (BP) decoding. The FER is used as the search criterion. In other words, for binary PSK-modulated signals transmitted over the AWGN channel with a given SNR per bit we search for the FER-minimizing parity-check matrix H∗ under coding and decoding complexity restrictions which will be discussed below.
For each candidate H we have to compute (by the MonteCarlo method) the function FER(H, SNR). In this paper, we are trying to reduce the search complexity measured as a number of candidates H (number of computed estimates for FER(H, SNR)), while preserving near-optimality of the solution and taking into account the low-complexity requirement.
In Section II, we introduce notations and formulate the code search problem. In Section III, we describe our code search technique and demonstrate its efficiency when applied to search for binary QC LDPC block codes. Modifications of this technique to search for good LDPC convolutional and for nonbinary LDPC block codes are discussed in Sections IV and V. We describe code examples and present simulation results. The efficiency of involving a channel model into the code optimization loop is demonstrated in Section VI via an example of FTN signaling combined with LDPC coding. We summarize all findings in the Conclusion.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:09:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4799-5985-3/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

243

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

II. DEFINITIONS AND PROBLEM FORMULATION A rate R = b/c parent LDPC convolutional code can be determined by its polynomial parity-check matrix H(D) of syndrome memory µ

H(D) = {hij(D)} , i = 1, 2, ..., c − b, j = 1, 2, ..., c (1)

where hij(D) is either zero or a monomial entry, that is, hij(D) = Dwij with wij being a nonnegative integer, wij ≤ µ. Its degree matrix W = {wij}, i = 1, 2, ..., c − b, j = 1, 2, ..., c, is the (c − b) × c matrix with entries wij at the positions of the monomials Dwij and wij = −1 at the zero positions. By tailbiting the parent convolutional code to length M > µ we obtain the parity-check matrix HTB of an (M c, M b) QC LDPC block code. If each column of H(D) contains J nonzero elements and each row contains K nonzero elements the QC LDPC block code is (J, K)-regular, and irregular otherwise.
The polynomial parity-check matrix H(D) (1) can be interpreted as a base matrix B labeled by monomials, where B is the (c − b) × c binary matrix with ones at the positions of the nonzero entries of H(D). Hence, the problem of finding new QC LDPC codes can be reduced to finding suitable base matrices B as well as proper labelings for the base Tanner graphs GB determined by B.
For irregular QC LDPC block codes, let Jmin and Jmax denote the minimum and maximum numbers of the nonzero entries in any column of H(D), respectively. Then the column degree distribution of the parity-check matrix H(D) as well as of the base matrix B is given by the vector
λs = d(1)(n1) d(2)(n2) . . . d(l)(nl)

where ni is the number of columns with d(i) nonzero elements,

d(1) = Jmin, d(l) = Jmax, and

l i=1

ni

=

c.

Let the columns of H(D) be ordered in increasing order

of their column weight. Denote by Hij(D), i, j = 1, 2, . . . , c,

j > i, a submatrix of H(D) formed by the columns with

numbers i, i + 1, ..., j and by g(H) the girth of the Tanner

graph of the code determined by H. We call the c-tuple

g = g1 g2 . . . gc = g

where gi = g(H1i(D)), i = 1, 2, ..., c − 1, the girth profile (GP) of the QC LDPC block code determined by H(D).
Let w denote the length of a sliding window containing w consecutive columns of H(D). In [7] a sliding-window girth (SWG) gw was introduced as

gw = min
i=0,...,c−w

g

Hii++1w (D)

Using the girth profile for code optimization is, in some sense, analogous to using the ACE. Since the columns are ordered according to increasing weights, we can require that lowweight columns would have larger girth and we let higherweight columns have lower girth.
One of the restrictions on the structure of a base matrix which is important for practical applications is the encoding

complexity. Similarly to [8] we consider polynomial paritycheck matrices of the parent convolutional code in the form

H(D) = Hbd(D) h0(D) H(c−b)×b(D)

(2)

where the first part Hbd is a bidiagonal matrix of size (c − b) × (c − b − 1), h0(D) is a column with exactly three nonzero elements, two of which are identical monomials, and H(c−b)×b(D) can be any monomial submatrix of the proper size. It is straightforward to show that for such a bidiagonal parity-check matrix the encoding can be performed recursively with complexity growing linearly with code length.

III. QC LDPC BLOCK CODE OPTIMIZATION
Assume that the required code rate R = b/c, the number c of columns of the parity-check matrix H(D) and the parameter M (circulant size or TB length) are chosen from delay and complexity restrictions. In this case, the QC LDPC block code optimization includes a search for good column degree distributions (CDD), good base matrices B, and then good degree matrices W . The chosen pair (B, W ) determines H. The pseudocode of the search algorithm is presented as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 General algorithm for QC LDPC block code optimization
Input: Size of base matrix (c − b) × c, tailbiting length M for all candidate CDDs do
Generate set of “combinatorially good” candidate base matrices B
for each good B do Generate set of “combinatorially good” degree matrices W Preselect a small set of matrices W using preliminary
computer simulations end for
Include the pair (B, W ) in the list of candidates if the estimated FER is good enough end for Select the best code by thorough computer simulation of each candidate (B, W ) from the obtained list of candidates Output: The parity-check matrix of the QC LDPC block code in the form (B, W )

If we preselect the shape of the parity-check matrix as

shown in (2), then one component of the degree distribution

is fixed (at least limited from below), n2 ≥ c − b − 1 and n3 ≥ 1, which reduces the complexity of the search over the degree distributions.

Notice that the complexity of the exhaustive search over

the possible CDDs is not that high as it seems. We should

distribute the weights from the set {3, 4, . . . , c − b} over the

b columns of the information part of B. Let h ≤ c − b − 2

denote the number of different column weights. Then it is easy

to see that for b ≥ h the total number of candidate degree

distributions is equal to

b+h−1 h−1

.

For

example,

in

case

of

rate

R = 1/2, b = 12, c = 24, it was found empirically that

choosing h > 4 does not improve code performance. Then

it is enough to check not more than

15 3

= 455 candidates.

Moreover, many of the bad degree distributions (e.g., too dense

and too sparse) can be rejected at a low computational cost.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:09:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
244

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

Consider the problem of selecting a base matrix for a given degree distribution.
We construct the base matrix B = {bi}, i = 1, 2, . . . , c, where bi denotes the ith column of B, randomly column-bycolumn in order of increasing column weight by using the following criteria, listed in the order of their usage:
• Number of common positions in columns. • Number of common triples in columns intersecting in
more than 3 positions, • Girth gBt of the Tanner graph of the current base matrix
Bt of size (c − b) × t, t = 1, 2, . . . , c. • Sum of weights of columns participating in the shortest
cycle (approximate cycle extrinsic message degrees [9] (ACE)-like criterion). • Multiplicity of the cycles with minimum ACE value. • FER estimate obtained by simulation using several randomly selected degree matrices W .
We create a shortlist of best base matrices B according to these criteria.
Now we are searching for the best weighting matrix W for a given base matrix B.
We select elements of W at random from {1, 2, ..., M }, column by column, taking into account the above formulated restrictions. To select the best ith column-candidate, we use the following criteria: the girth of the current submatrix must be not less than a predetermined number gi and the SWG must be not less than a predetermined value gw.
We ran the procedure for i = c − b + 1, c − b + 2, ..., c. If for a given set of restrictions the algorithm failed to find any matrix W or found too few, we relaxed some of restrictions and started the algorithm again. Finally, for all candidate matrices W (typically about one thousand) we estimated FER for targeted SNRs and selected the final winner.
From the complexity point of view the most time-consuming steps are related to computing the girths of the submatrices of a parity-check matrix. A fast girth computing algorithm was presented in [10].
To demonstrate the efficiency of the described search technique when applied to the WiMAX standard we consider codes of rates R = 1/2 and R = 3/4, c = 24, as in [8] and two extreme delay values, covering both short delay (M =24, n=576) and relatively long delay (M =96, n=2304).
The degree distributions which were selected using the above optimization are given in Table I. We have presented column degree distributions from the WiMAX standard [8] and the asymptotically optimum distribution from [6] in the same table. The difference between the asymptotic and finite-length optimized distributions can be easily explained: a large amount of high-weight columns leads asymptotically to decreasing FER performance but it creates a large amount of short cycles and thereby leads to a performance degradation for finite lengths.
Fig. 1 shows the FER and BER performances of the constructed QC LDPC block code of rate R = 1/2 and their counterpart from [8]. It is easy to see that the new

TABLE I COLUMN DEGREE DISTRIBUTION EXAMPLES

R M Column degree distribution Remark

24 2(11), 3(8), 4(1), 10(4)

1 2

96

2(11), 3(8), 4(2), 11(3)

24–96 2(11), 3(8), 6(5)

Computer search WiMAX

— 2(6),3(6),5(3),12(9)

Asymptotic [6]

Fig. 1. FER plots for the code from the WiMAX standard and the new codes with base matrices of size (12 × 24) and (16 × 32), R = 1/2

codes provide significant improvements in both FER and BER performance.

IV. CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

From a parity-check matrix of the QC LDPC block code presented in form (1), by letting the tailbiting length M → ∞ we obtain a binary parity-check matrix of an LDPC convolutional code. Moreover, the above mentioned linear complexity encoding procedure for the QC LDPC block codes can be used for encoding LDPC convolutional codes as well.
In order to decode an LDPC CC we use sliding window decoding (SWD) [11], [12]. This decoder is determined by a binary parity-check matrix

 H0T . . . HµT 0 0 . . . 0 

 0 H0T . . . HµT 0 . . . 0 



HSTWD

=

 

...

... ...

... ...

...

  

(3)

 

0

...

0

H0T . . . HµT

0

 

0 0 . . . 0 H0T . . . HµT

of size (ω−µ)c×ω(c−b), where ω ≥ 2(µ+1) denotes the size of the decoding window and Hi, i = 0, 1, ..., µ, are the series expansion coefficients of H(D). We introduce an additional parameter S < ω which determines the number of input and output blocks of size b and c symbols, respectively, which are processed at each step. The decoding delay measured as the number of c-blocks is denoted by L. One step of the SWD is illustrated in Fig. 2 [13].
At each step of the decoding algorithm, Sc received likelihoods enter the decoder. These input likelihoods together with (ω − S)c likelihoods from the decoder buffer are processed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:09:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
245

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

rtt+S−1 rt−1 ...

Decoding window ω

Delay L

Shift S

... rt−ω

rtt−−ω1

rtt−−LL+S−1 ← r˜tt−−LL+S−1

BP decoder

uˆ tt−−LL+S−1

r˜tt−−LL+S−1 = (1 − α)rtt−−LL+S−1 + αstt−−LL+S−1

Fig. 2. Sliding window decoding

Fig. 3. Comparison of BER performances for delay equal to 64800
together by a predetermined number of iterations of the BP decoding and Sb decoded information bits uˆtt−−LL+S−1, corresponding to the Sc likelihoods that entered the decoder L steps ago, are the output from the decoder. Then the buffer content is shifted by Sc input values and the next Sc received likelihoods enter the decoder. Thus, the decoding delay is equal to Lc input symbols.
The important question is how the block of ωc loglikelyhoods (LLRs) stt−−1ω computed by the BP decoder at step t should be taken into account at the following steps of decoding. In our simulations the buffer content was updated by a linear combination of the channel output and the newly obtained LLRs. In most simulations we used α = 1/2. For large block lengths and low SNRs, α = 1/4 was preferred.
Although the optimization technique for convolutional codes differs from that for LDPC block codes only in the range of degrees wij of elements of the degree matrix W , the found parent LDPC CCs of the best QC LDPC block codes do not coincide with the best LDPC CCs.
The following LDPC CCs and BCs shall be compared:
B3 DVB-S2 LDPC BC, n = 64800, k = 32400 B4 Optimized (M c, M b) QC LDPC BCs, b = 16, c = 32,
M = 1012 (code B4S) and 2025 (code B4L) obtained from the parent convolutional code with µ =500 C2 LDPC CC of rate R = 16/32, µ = 500

Notice that the newly optimized LDPC BCs with µ = 500 have significantly better BER performance than the LDPC BC from the DVB-S2 standard. They also perform better than the optimized LDPC CC codes for the same delay-complexity restrictions. Moreover, one of the new codes B4 has length 32384, that is, two times shorter decoding delay than the code from the DVB-S2 standard.
If the complexity restriction is relaxed, then the optimized LDPC CC wins compared to the optimized LDPC BC with approximately the same delay at the low SNR region. Motivated by the gain obtained at low SNRs we have simulated the same LDPC CC with the same complexity restriction ω = 8µ and increased delay L = 6µ. It can be seen that the BER ≈ 10−7 is achieved by the new LDPC CC with decoding delay 96000 at 0.62 dB, that is, it performs only about 0.43 dB from the Shannon limit for the binary input AWGN channel.
The obtained results show that if irregular LDPC CCs suitable for low-complexity encoding are optimized under delay-complexity constraints then they are still inferior to their optimized block counterparts and LDPC BCs from the standards. However, they play an important role as parent codes for QC LDPC BCs and are potentially good candidates to be channel capacity approaching codes when large decoding delays are acceptable.
V. NONBINARY LDPC BLOCK AND QC BLOCK CODES
It is well-known that nonbinary (NB) LDPC block codes of short and moderate lengths with generalized BP decoding demonstrate so far the best FER and BER performance among generalizations of binary LDPC block codes with iterative decoding procedures. However, this performance improvement is achieved at the cost of increasing both the encoding and decoding complexity (see [14], [15] and references therein).
We consider binary images of nonbinary LDPC codes over Galois field GF(2m), m > 1. In general, check nodes processing requires MAP decoding over the trellis having q = 2m states with q branches entering and leaving each state. Thus, in general, the computational complexity of iterative decoding is proportional to q2. Several simplified decoding techniques for nonbinary LDPC block codes were suggested (see [15] and references therein).
In order to simplify the search for good long NB LDPC block codes and to satisfy low-complexity encoding and decoding restrictions, we focus on a class of nonbinary QC LDPC block codes.
We describe a rate R = b/c NB QC LDPC block code by its polynomial parity-check matrix (1) whose parity-check polynomials hij(D) are either zero or monomial entries βijDwij of degree wij, where wij are nonnegative integers, and βij are nonzero elements of GF(2m), i = 1, 2, ..., c − b, j = 1, 2, ..., c. By replacing all nonzero entries in (1) by 1 we obtain the corresponding base matrix B = H(D) D=1.
A parity-check matrix of the (M c, M b) q-ary LDPC block code can be obtained by replacing degrees of D in H(D) (1) by the corresponding powers of the M × M permutation matrix P , M > µ = maxi,j{wij}. Another option is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:09:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
246

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

interpreting H(D) as a polynomial parity-check matrix of the

convolutional code and applying to it tailbiting termination, as

described in Section II for binary codes. We obtain a binary image of the q-ary code, q = 2m, by replacing each nonzero element βij = αsij ∈ GF(q) by the corresponding power of
the companion matrix for the primitive element α and the zero

elements by the m × m all-zero matrix.

Notice that the parity-check matrix (1) with entries hij(D)= βijDwij can also be represented by its degree matrix W = {wij} and the matrix of the coefficients A = {βij}, i = 1, 2, ..., c − b, j = 1, 2, ..., c, where wij = −1, βij = 0 if hij(D) = 0. Constructing NB QC LDPC block codes is reduced to finding matrices (W, A) satisfying certain criteria

while taking into account the complexity and delay restric-

tions.

To reduce the search complexity, instead of joint optimiza-

tion of three matrices (base matrix B, degree matrix W , and

matrix of coefficients A), similarly to the Algorithm 1, we

performed the search for each of them, selecting a set of

candidates to be used for the next stage. Base matrices with

all column weights equal to 2 won compared to other choices

of degree distributions and good candidates for base matrices

are incidence matrices representing the smallest graphs with

a given girth [16]. For constructing the matrix A we precon-

structed (similar to [17]) a data bank of good “row codes”,

which are binary images of nonbinary codes determined by

nonzero elements of rows of A.

We present here two examples of optimized NB QC LDPC rate R = 1/2 codes over GF(28) which compete with the

DVB-S2 standard code. The first code of length 18720 =

8 × 2340 (in bits) is determined by the base matrix B of

size 1170×2340 obtained via tailbiting the polynomial parity-

check matrix

1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 

D 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 

Hconv (D)

=

 

0

D4

0

01

0

0 1 D35

0

 

(4)

 

0

0 D29 0 0 D15 0 1

0

1

 

0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 D26

at length 234. The girth of the base Tanner graph is equal to 20 [16]. The rows of the matrix A of size 1170×2340 are labeled at random as described above.
The second code of length 16640 = 8 × 52 × 40 (in bits) is determined by the base matrix B of size 26 × 52 obtained via tailbiting the polynomial parity-check matrix

Hconv(D) =

1 1

1 D

1 D3

1 D9

(5)

at length 13. The girth of the corresponding base Tanner graph is equal to 12 [16]. Then the W and A matrices for M = 40 are optimized as described above.
As we can see from the simulation results presented in Fig 4 the performance of the two nonbinary codes are rather close and the second code has advantages in sense of encoding and decoding complexity requirements. Both codes perform substantially better than the almost four times longer code selected for the DVB-S2 standard.

Fig. 4. Nonbinary versus binary long QC LDPC

VI. LDPC CODE OPTIMIZATION FOR A GIVEN CHANNEL
MODEL
The optimization algorithms presented above used preliminary simulations to exclude non-promising code candidates. Thus, if at the corresponding steps of these algorithms the channel model will be taken into account, then it will strongly influence the preferred code parameters, in particular, its degree distribution. In this section, we consider code optimization for QPSK signaling over the AWGN channel with bandwidth F Hz when communicating with inter-signal time interval T shorter than the Nyquist interval T0 = 1/(2F ) sec. Such a transmission, called Faster-Than-Nyquist (FTN) signaling, causes “controlled” inter-symbol interference (ISI).
This technique of increasing the data transfer rate while preserving frequency bandwidth dates back to Mazo [18]. A recent survey of FTN technology can be found in [19].

input message

QC LDPC encoder

Pulse former

output message

L

+

Decoder

Lext

AWGN

L

+

Equalizer

Lext

Bandpass channel
1st global iteration Other iterations

local iterations (inside decoder)

global iterations

Fig. 5. Block diagram of the FTN signaling system using LDPC codes

If an LDPC code of rate R is used with BPSK signaling (in each of the two orthogonal channels) with intervals of duration T = τ /(2F ), τ < 1, then the equivalent data rate is equal to RFTN = R/τ > R. The payment for increasing the data rate is unavoidable ISI, which causes a substantial increase in complexity of the receiver. Fortunately, due to [20], the problem of combating ISI can be solved efficiently by combining an MAP equalizer with an iterative decoder of an LDPC code (turbo-codes were considered in [20]). The block diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 5. In this diagram

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:09:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
247

2014 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC)

Fig. 6. FTN and Nyquist signaling for code length 64800, RFTN = R = 3/4
L and Lext denote, respectively, log-likelihoods estimates and extrinsic information of the equalizer and BP decoder of the LDPC code.
At the first global iteration the equalizer receives channel output data and produces estimates of log-likelihoods taking into account the intentionally introduced ISI. The output of the equalizer enters the LDPC decoder which produces new estimates after some BP decoding iterations (30 in our case). The difference L−Lext represents the input of the equalizer at the global iterations. We used not more than 5 global iterations in our simulations.
In Fig. 6 we illustrate the importance of involving a channel model into the optimization loop. The BER and FER performances of BP decoding of the LDPC block code of rate R = 1/2 and length 64800 optimized for FTN signaling with τ = 0.67 [21] are compared with the same performances of the rate R = 3/4 DVB-S2 standard LDPC code with Nyquist signaling. The performances of the rate R = 1/2 LDPC code optimized for Nyquist signaling and the rate R = 1/2 standard DVB-S2 code both used for FTN signaling with τ = 0.67 are presented as well. We see that the total optimization gain is about 0.6 dB and it is achievable only if the channel is involved into the optimization loop.
Although the R = 1/2 LDPC code optimized for Nyquist signaling has better performance than that of the standard code for the AWGN model this code is inferior when used for FTN signaling compared to both the standard and the FTNoptimized codes.
VII. CONCLUSION
We presented a code search technique which appears to be efficient for finding good LDPC codes for different applications. This technique implies that the optimization is split into two steps: optimization of the base matrix and optimization of the labeling. The main idea is a greedy column-by-column construction of base and degree matrices with supporting a predetermined degree distribution, girth profile, and sliding window girth of the corresponding Tanner graph.
With minor changes, we applied this method to finding

binary QC LDPC codes, binary convolutional codes, and
nonbinary LDPC block codes, and to FTN signaling with
LDPC coding. Simulation results show that all found codes
are competitive with the best ones known in this art. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to Fredrik Rusek for introducing
them into the FTN signaling area. REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–546, 1981.
[2] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf, Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, 2007.
[3] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf, Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, 2005.
[4] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, 2004.
[5] Z. Li and B. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Conference Record of the Thirty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, 2004, vol. 2. IEEE, 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[6] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[7] I. E. Bocharova, R. Johannesson, F. Hug, and B. D. Kudryashov, “Highrate QC LDPC codes of short and moderate length with good girth profile,” in Proc. of 7th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing, Aug. 2012.
[8] “Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems IEEE P802.16e/D12 Draft,” Oct. 2005.
[9] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[10] I. Bocharova, R. Johannesson, F. Hug, B. Kudryashov, and R. Satyukov, “Searching for voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, Apr. 2012.
[11] J. A. Felstro¨m and K. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf, Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep 1999.
[12] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Feltstro¨m, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060– 1069, 2008.
[13] I. Bocharova, R. Johannesson, and B. Kudryashov, “LDPC convolutional codes versus QC LDPC block codes in communication standard scenarios,” in 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2014. Proceedings. IEEE, 2014, accepted for publication.
[14] M. Davey and D. J. C. Mackay, “Low density parity check codes over GF (q),” IEEE Commun Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, 1998.
[15] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Decoding algorithms for nonbinary LDPC codes over GF (q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 633–643, 2007.
[16] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V. Satyukov, “Graphbased convolutional and block LDPC codes,” Problems of Information Transmission, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 357–377, 2009.
[17] C. Poulliat, M. Fossorier, and D. Declercq, “Design of regular (2, dc)LDPC codes over GF (q) using their binary images,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1626–1635, 2008.
[18] J. Mazo, “Faster-than-Nyquist signaling,” Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1451–1462, 1975.
[19] J. B. Anderson, F. Rusek, and V. O¨ wall, “Faster-than-Nyquist signaling,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 101, no. 8, pp. 1817–1830, Aug 2013.
[20] M. Tuchler, R. Ko¨tter, and A. C. Singer, “Turbo equalization: Principles and new results,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 754–767, 2002.
[21] J. Yu, Park, F. Rusek, B. Kudryashov, and I. Bocharova, “High order modulation in Faster-than-Nyquist signaling communication systems,” in 2014 IEEE Vehicle Technology Conference (VTC Fall). IEEE, 2014, accepted for publication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:09:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
248

