A Real-Time High-Throughput LDPC Decoder for IEEE 802.3an Standard
Jui-Hui Hung1, Li-Wei Kao and Sau-Gee Chen2
Institute of Electronics & Department of Electronics Engineering National Chiao Tung University Hsinchu, Taiwan
1paholisi.nctu@gmail.com 2sgchen@mail.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract—The existing LDPC decoders are mostly based on the belief-propagation (BP) algorithms, due to good BER performances. However, they demand large chip areas. This paper proposes a high-throughput LDPC decoder based on the bit-flipping algorithms, for the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code adopted in the IEEE 802.3an standard. High decoding performances and low iteration numbers are achieved by introducing a strategy of flipping low-correlation bits and an additional syndrome vote scheme. As a result, the decoding performance is very close to the most popular BP-based min-sum algorithm (MSA) but with much lower computational complexity. Besides, the decoder achieves high hardware utilization with realtime processing capability. Synthesized with UMC 90nm process, the decoder chip area, throughput and average power dissipation are 1.42M gates, 16Gbps and 368mW, respectively, at 500MHz clock rate. Compared with existing BP-based designs, it has much smaller chip area and lower power dissipation, with comparable performances.
Keywords-channel coding; ldpc; hardware design; 802.3an standard
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were invented [1] in the early 1960. They have been shown to achieve the BER performance very close to the Shannon bound, when it is operated with iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm and sufficiently long code length [2]. There are many LDPC decoding methods in the literature. The sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3], a realization of the BP algorithm, has the best decoding performance. However, it is impractical for applications, due to its complexity. In comparison, the popular modified min-sum algorithm (MSA) [4] simplified from SPA has lower complexity, with comparable performance to SPA. Nonetheless, it involves huge computation. Therefore, to meet the decoding throughput requirement, fully-parallel LDPC decoders [5], [6] were proposed. However, those decoders are very area consuming.
In contrast, the conventional BF algorithm [1] has a much simpler bit-update scheme and hence a much lower complexity than BP algorithms. BF algorithms simply flip those potential error bits one by one, until the check matrix equation is equal to zero. However, its performance is much lower than SPA and MSA. To alleviate this problem, some improved BF techniques have been proposed, including the weighted bit-flipping (WBF) algorithm [7], the modified WBF (MWBF) algorithm [8], and

the improved MWBF (IMWBF) algorithm [9]. Among those BF algorithms, IMWBF algorithm has the best decoding performance, with comparable complexity to other BF algorithms. Nevertheless, all of them are still significantly inferior to BP-based algorithms in terms of performance.
All the mentioned BF-based algorithms only flip one bit in each iteration and demand high iteration counts to obtain the final results. To speed up decoding process, recently we proposed a multi-bit flipping decoding algorithm, called LCSTMBF algorithm [10]. It achieves high decoding performances with low iteration counts. Since it has much lower complexities than the BP-based algorithms, it is suited for applications with very high throughput requirements. In this work, we apply the algorithm to the decoder hardware realization of the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code [11] used by the 10-Gbps IEEE 802.3an standard [12]. The proposed decoder not only satisfies the high throughput requirement, but also has much smaller chip area compared with the existing BP-based decoder architectures.
II. THE LCST-MBF ALGORITHM [10]
LCST-MBF algorithm combines the most effective IMWBF algorithms with our two recently proposed algorithms, termed Culprit Syndrome Test (CST) algorithm [13] and LowCorrelation Multi-Bit Flipping (LCMBF) algorithm [14]. As such, the proposed decoding algorithm not only improves the BER performance, but also reduces the iteration number of the existing BF decoding algorithms effectively.
The basic idea of the CST algorithm is to single out and flip the most probable culprit error bits which have more 1s than 0s in its associated syndrome bits in the syndrome vector. By doing so, the syndrome vector will get closer to the zero vector than before. One can simply identify a culprit bit by checking its reliability [7] and applying the majority vote operation on the bit’s associated syndrome bits.
To speed up the LDPC decoding process, the most intuitive and simplest way is to flip more than one bit in each iteration. However, there is risk that one may induce additional error bits and propagate the errors to later iterations [14]. The error probability can be reduced by employing the LCMBF algorithm which introduces a search scheme for lowcorrelation culprit bits as briefly explained below.
Tanner graph [15] is a convenient way of demonstrating the LDPC decoding mechanism between the message bits (i.e., the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a2d5e1d9o-n8/J1u0ne/$2246,2.00026©a2t 0021:027I:E10EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

bit nodes) and the syndrome vector (i.e., the check nodes). Through Tanner graph, one can define three different kinds of correlation relationship between any two bit nodes as: (1) Unconnected: There is no any path connecting these two bit nodes. (2) Indirectly connected: These two bit nodes are connected by a path, and the path passes through more than one check node in between these two bit nodes. (3) Directly connected: These two bit nodes are connected by a path, and the path passes through only one check node in between these two bit nodes.
It can be easily shown [14] that if two bit nodes are unconnected, then flipping any one of them will not affect the syndrome bit result of the other bit node. According to our intensive simulations [14], for any two indirectly connected bit nodes, there have roughly similar result (depending on the structure of Tanner graph) to that of the unconnected case. However, for any two directly connected bit nodes, by flipping one of these two bit nodes will very likely increase the number of 1s in the syndrome vector than before and cause severe growth of error bits. As a result, we can treat those unconnected and indirectly connected bits as low-correlation (LC) bits and particularly perform multi-bit flipping on them in the decoding process without causing error divergence. That is the key idea of the LCMBF algorithm. The decoding steps of the LCST-MBF algorithm are summarized below by combining the most effective BF-based IMWBF algorithm (as an example).
Step 1) Initialization: Set the maximum number of iterations Nitr and the number Nfb of bits to be flipped in each iteration to some prescribed values. Set the bit flipping index i=1 and iteration index j=1.
Step 2) First bit flipping: Utilize the reliability measure of IMWBF algorithm and CST algorithm to find out the first bit to flip.
Step 3) Decision of Low-correlation set: Find out the lowcorrelation (LC) bit set. If the LC bit set is empty, go to Step 6.
Step 4) Next bit flipping: Same as Step 2), find out the next bit to flip from LC bit set using CST algorithm. Set i=i+1.
Step 5) Test if a multi-bit flipping is completed: If i> Nfb, set i=1, otherwise go to Step3.
Step 6) Test if end of decoding operation: Set j=j+1. If j> Nitr or the parity-check equation is satisfied, then output the decoding results, otherwise go to Step 2.
III. THE PROPOSED LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE
The parity-check matrix H of the IEEE 802.3an LDPC code is regular with column weight and row weights equal to 6 and 32, respectively. According to simulation results, data with 4-bit long and two fractional bits is enough for the proposed decoder design to meet the BER performance requirement.
To achieve 10Gbps throughput of the IEEE 802.3an standard, we propose a fully-parallel decoder architecture as shown in Fig. 1. It is based on the LCST-MBF algorithm and the parity-check matrix H specified in the standard. It consists

of 32 Input Processing Units (IPU), an Index generator, 384 Check Node Units (CNU), 2048 Bit Node Units (BNU), 2048 Flipping-Bit Decision Units (FBDU), a Syndrome Test Unit (STU), a Max-8 sorter, a Correlation Detector, a Multi-bit flipping unit and several register sets. Besides, the decoder receives 32 channel values at a time similar to the architecture in [6] due to the limitation on the number of I/O pads in IC packaging. Hence, decoding of each codeword should be finished in 2048/32=64 clock cycles.
An IPU outputs the one-bit hard-decision value and absolute value of its input channel value (which is quantized to 4 bits long. The index Generator assigns an 11-bit index to each output absolute value. The 32 1-bit hard-decision values from 32 IPUs will be stored in Codeword 1 and 2 register sets for later syndrome test. The combined 15-bit index and absolute value for each received channel value are then passed to its CNU through interconnection network 1 (ICN1). A CNU module finds the minimum and second minimum values among all its input absolute channel values. Besides, all of the absolute channel values of the BF-based decoders are temporarily stored in the register files until the decoding process for this codeword is finished.
In the proposed design, when the current codeword is being decoded, the oncoming channel values and hard-decision code bits of the next codeword are simultaneously delivered to another register sets. With this overlapped and pipeline design, the proposed architecture can achieve 100% hardware utilization.
STU computes the syndrome vector by using the harddecision bit values from IPUs. It consists of 384 exclusive-OR gates, and each gate accepts a specific set of 32 code bits which participate in a particular check node operation. STU passes the syndrome vector to BNUs through the interconnection network 2 (ICN2). BNUs compute the reliabilities of all the bit nodes based on the channel values and syndrome vector and pass their results to FBDUs. FBDUs will decide which bit can be flipped by using the concept of CST algorithm. Next, the decoder needs to decide the code bits to flip. According to LCST-MBF algorithm, the decoder should find out the LC culprit bit set and flip some bits in the set which have larger reliabilities than the other bits in each iteration. Therefore, the decoder has to rank all the bit nodes according to their reliabilities. However, directly sorting 2048 channel values will take enormous time. Instead, this work proposes a special design, named Max-8 sorter to effectively solve the problem, as will be detailed later.
After that, the indices of the sorted bit nodes will be transmitted to the Correlation Detector and the detector will tell the multi-bit flipping unit the specific bits to flip. This operation will continue until all Nfb (multi) bits or no more bit node left in the set is flipped. The decoded bits are outputted when the decoded information bits satisfy the check constraint HxT = 0 (where x denotes the decoded codeword vector), or when the iteration number exceeds a defined maximum iteration number. The architectures of some major functional units are discussed below.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. The proposed LDPC decoder architecture.

A. Function units of the proposed architecture

1) ChGeck Node Unit

Let b = [b , b , b , ..., b ] be the binary hard-decision

123

2048

sequence vector obtained from the receiver as follows:

b i

=

⎧1 ⎩⎨0

if yi if yi

≤0 > 0,

i

=1

to

2048,

(1)

where yi is the received channel value of the ith bit node. The check node equation of IMWBF algorithm is:

| y | = min y , j = 1 to 384,

(2)

min −i , j

k

k :b ∈B ( c )\ b

k

j

i

where B(c ) represents the set of bit nodes that participate in j

the

parity-check

equation

of

the

jth

check

node

c, j

B(c j ) \ bi

represents the set

B(c ) j

excluding the ith bit node in

c j

and yk

is the received channel value of the kth bit. According to (2), A

CNU only needs to find out the minimum and second minimum absolute values rmin and rmin2 of the received channel values which participate in the jth check node computed in the previous clock cycle. Since the proposed decoder receives 32 channel values in each clock cycle, The CNU should temporarily store the partial results in registers. The architecture of the jth CNU is shown in Fig. 2, where ri,j represents the ith input of the jth check node which has an 11-

bit index and a 4-bit channel value.

2) Bit Node Unit A BNU executes the following bit node equation of
IMWBF algorithm:

∑ E = i

(2s j

−1)⋅ |

y |min −i , j

−α ⋅

y i

, i = 1 to

2048,

(3)

j:c j ∈C ( bi )

where C(bi ) denotes the set of check nodes connected to bit

node

i

,

s j

is the

jth syndrome and E i

is the reliability from

the ith BNU . The optimal α is 0.4 based on simulations for the (1723, 2048) RS-LDPC code. However, α is set to 1/2 which basically does not need any hardware cost. Since the column weight of H is 6, there are 7 inputs to BNE equation (3) which can be realized by using only three 2-input adders and one 2-input subtractor in each BNU. The word length of

E is extended to 6 bits to preserve the output accuracy. i

Fig. 2. The architecture of the jth CNU with m inputs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. The architecture of the Max-8 sorter.

0
10

-2
10

-4
10

BE R

-6
10

-8
10

-10
10
-12
10 3

BPSK IMWBF IMWBF with LCST-MBF Modified MSA
456789 SNR

10 11 12 13

Fig. 4. The (4,2) fixed-point performance of the LCST-MBF algorithm combined with IMWBF algorithm at Nbf = 2 and Nitr = 3, for 802.3an standard.

3) Flipping Bit Decision Unit (FBDU) A FBDU simply executes the majority vote operation

Maj(s , s ,..., s ) on its input syndrome bits associated with

i ,1 i , 2

i,6

bit node i. Note that all the 2048 bit nodes execute their own

majority vote operations in parallel. If a bit node passes

majority vote, then Maj(s , s ,..., s ) = 1 and the input

i ,1 i ,2

i ,6

reliability will be directly outputted, otherwise

Maj(s , s , ..., s ) = 0 and the output will be set to the

i ,1 i ,2

i ,6

minimum 6-bit 2’s complement value 100000 so that the bit

will never be flipped. Specifically, the outputs of the FBDU for

the ith bit node are:

{MUX (100000, E , Maj(s , s ,..., s )), Index _ i}, where s

i

i ,1 i ,2

i ,6

i, j

is the jth syndrome bit from the ith BNU, and MUX(a,b,c)

represents a MUX operation controlled by c. Bit node index

Index _ i is also outputted, for the requirements of the

following units.

4) Max-8 Sorter The Max-8 sorter finds out the 8 bit nodes with the largest
reliabilities among all bit nodes. Instead of ranking all the 2048 reliability values Ei s received from FBDU with extremely high complexity, we propose a novel sorting architecture (as shown in Fig. 3) which significantly reduces the sorter complexities. First, the 2048 Ei values are compared against a dynamically adjusted threshold value in the comparators

represented by those circles that enclose the comparison sign “>”. For each comparison result, an additional flag bit will be put in front of the MSB of the input reliability value. The flag is set to ‘1’ if the Ei is larger than the threshold; otherwise, it is set to ‘0’. The comparison operations intend to quickly tag the 8 largest reliability values from the 2048 values for later sorting operations with low complexity.
Since the input reliability values are different in different decoding iterations, it is hard to define the comparison threshold. Hence, the proposed design updates the threshold iteratively by using the following dynamic adjustment scheme:

{ Ti+1 =

T −Δ ,

i

i

T +Δ ,

i

i

if if

Ni Ni

<8 > 8,

(4)

Δi+1

=

Δ i

/

2,

if

Ni

≠ 8,

where

T, i

Δ, i

Ni

are the threshold, threshold adjustment

and

the number of inputs exceeding the threshold in the ith

adjustment iteration, respectively. The adjustment iteration

ends when Ni = 8 .
Together with the MSB flag bits, all the 2048 reliability values are sent to the Flag-Bit Tree Comparator (FBTC). FBTC quickly compares all the 2048 flag bits by using binary tree comparators and outputs the final 16 results (each containing its own associated reliability value Ei' , bit node index and the majority vote result) to the following Max-8 detector unit.

Meantime, the Threshold Adjuster computes the Ni value by summing up all the 16 MSB flag bits from FBTC, and then executes (4).

Note that there are 8 zero MSB flag bits out of the 16 MSB flag bits from FBTC. The Max-8 detector further blocks those 8 zero flag bits and all their associated bit nodes information. That will leave exactly the 8 largest reliability values whose MSB flag bits are all one.

Finally, those 8 reliability values are sent to the 8-input sorter for a magnitude ranking of them. The ranking results and their associated majority vote results are then sent to the Correlation Detector so that the final culprit bits set and lowcorrelation bit nodes are defined and output to the Multi-bit flipping unit.

In the Max-8 sorter, efficient FBTC and Max-8 detector architectures have been devised with low complexities and small delay times. Particularly, FBTC unit performs approximated binary-tree flag bit comparison algorithm. As a result, there is no need to do a full comparison operation among all the 2048 reliability values. From analysis, the decoding performance will be slightly degraded by about 0.02dB using the simplification, compared with full sorting results. But the gain in the complexity reduction is enormous.

5) Correlation Detector The low-correlation bit nodes (as defined in LCST-MBF
algorithm) of the 8 bit nodes from the 8-input sorter are found in Correlation Detector. The detector is also carefully designed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with some architectural novelty. Due to page limitation, it performance than existing BP-based decoders, in terms of

detailed description is omitted here.

speed, area and power consumption.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
As mentioned in section III, the proposed decoder takes 64 clock cycles for the decoding of a single codeword. Based on simulations, the optimal iteration number of the decoder is 3. Its fixed-point performance with Nbf = 2 and Nitr = 3 is presented in Fig. 4. In the figure, we observe that LCST-MBF algorithm improves the BER performance by about 3dB over IMWBF algorithm. The proposed decoder is synthesized with SynopsysTM Design Compiler and the cell library based on the UMC CMOS 90-nm process technology. Since BF-based algorithms are much simpler than BP-based algorithms, the synthesized decoder’s critical path is very small, and the maximum clock rate can reach 500MHz. As such, the decoding throughput of the proposed design is

2048 bits × 500 MHz

= 16 Gbps,

(5)

64

which significantly exceeds the requirement of the IEEE 802.3an 10GBase-T standard. The synthesized total gate count and power consumption are about 1.42M and 368mW.
Compared with the existing designs for (2048,1723) RSLDPC code [5], [6], the proposed LDPC decoder has much smaller chip area and lower power consumption. This is due to the fact that BF-based algorithms do not need to do LLR message update operations and do not require the corresponding memory to store the updated messages for bit nodes and check nodes. Due to page limitation, the compared performance measures are omitted here.

V. CONCLUSION
A high-throughput LDPC decoder, based on our recently developed LCST-MBF decoding algorithm, for IEEE 802.3an 10G standard has been proposed. The synthesized decoder throughput is about 16Gbps which is much higher than the requirement 10Gbps of the IEEE 802.3an standard. Since the decoding algorithm is a BF-based algorithm, it has much lower complexity than the most popular BP-based decoding algorithms. Moreover, LCST-MBF algorithm incorporates two new performance-enhancement techniques that achieve an overall decoding performance comparable to the most popular BP-based MSA algorithm. As a result, with comparable decoding performance, the realized decoder has higher

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by the grants NSC 98-2220E-009 -029 and NSC 98-2219-E-009 -010, Taiwan.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low Density Parity Check Codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[4] J. Chen and M. P.C. Fossorier, “Near Optimum Universal Belief Propagation Based Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 50, pp. 583-587, no.3 Mar. 2002.
[5] T. Mohsenin and B. M. Baas, “High-Throughput LDPC Decoders Using a Multiple Split-Row Method,” IEEE ICASSP, vol. 2, pp. II–13–II–16, Apr. 2007.
[6] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps BitSerial Block-Interlaced Min-Sum LDPC Decoder in 0.13-μm CMOS,” IEEE CICC, pp. 459-462, 2007.
[7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and, M.P.C. Fossorier, “Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries: A Rediscovery and More,”IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 2711-2736, 2001.
[8] J. Zhang, M.P.C. Fossorier, “A Modified Weighted Bit-Flipping Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 165-167, Mar. 2004.
[9] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z.Shi, and Y. Chen, “An Improvement on the Modified Weighted Bit Flipping Decoding algorithm for LDPC Codes,”IEEE Commum. , vol. 9, no.9, pp.814-816, Sept. 2005.
[10] J.H. Hung and S.G. Chen, “A High-Performance Multibit-Flipping Algorithm for LDPC Decoding,” IEEE Proceedings of ISIC, pp. 1-5, Dec. 2009.
[11] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “Construction of Low-density Parity-check Codes Baesd on Shortened Reed-Solomon Codes with Two Information Symbols, “ IEEE Commun. Lett., no. 7, pp. 317-319, July 2003.
[12] Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Std. 802.3an, 2006.
[13] J.H. Hung and S.G. Chen, “An Efficient BF LDPC Decoding Algorithm Based on A Syndrome Vote Scheme,” IEEE Proceedings of APCC, pp. 1-5, Oct. 2008.
[14] J.H. Hung and S.G. Chen, “An Effective Multibit-Flipping Algorithm for LDPC Decoding,” IEEE Proceedings of ICSPCS, p.p. 15-17, Dec. 2008.
[15] R. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

