Construction Analysis of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Free-Space Optical Communication

Xiao Xuena
Department of Computer Foundation Studies Shandong Institute of Business and Technology
Shandong Yantai, China xxnzt@163.com

Xiao Xuena
Department of Computer Foundation Studies Shandong Institute of Business and Technology
Shandong Yantai, China xxnzt@163.com

Abstract—In this paper, we study channel model of free-space optical communication and compare the various parity-check matrix construction of low-density parity check codes. Through the comparison of various parity-check matrix construction and the thinking to the influence from ring, we find a improved parity-check matrix construction of low-density parity check codes——ʌ-rotated construction. Then we have a emulation analysis of construction capability between various parity-check matrix construction and ʌ-rotated construction.
Keywords— Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes; free-space optical communication; improved parity-check matrix construction; ʌ-rotated construction
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes introduced by Gallager were a good code which more closed to the Shannon limit [1], and it adopted the thinking of iterative decoding, so it was called Gallager codes, too. Because the study to LDPC codes was few, so many domains weren’t involved one of which was free-space optical communication. Especially in resent years people found that the performance of long LDPC codes was better than Turbo codes [2] in the same condition, which made the application study of LDPC codes for free-space optical communication more valuable.
II. CHANNEL MODEL ANALYSIS OF FREE-SPACE OPTICAL COMMUNICATION

Figure1 is the system model of free-space optical communication. The transmission medium of free-space optical communication is atmosphere channel. Because the parameters of aerosphere are random change, atmosphere swift current effect is the most important question to influence communication system when laser transmits in the atmosphere. We divide atmosphere swift current effect into strong swift current effect and weak swift current effect thinking about its influence to free-space optical communication link. Figure2 shows the influence of strong swift current and weak swift current to free-space optical communication. We can see from the figure2 free space optical communication has high error code rate in strong swift current effect even through we have used LDPC codes to check codes. It can’t reach the demand of communication. In this paper we study primarily the basal transmission characteristic of laser in the atmosphere, so we only take weak swift current effect to atmosphere channel into account in free-space optical communication.

Figure1. Free-space optical communication system frame

Figure2. The compare of strong swift current effect and weak swift current effect
Electrical signal usually transmits by cable. It isn’t exposed directly to atmosphere. So it is interfered correspondingly less and doesn’t change frequently. It has low demand to channel coding, too. Optical signal transmits directly by atmosphere. It is influenced badly by atmosphere.

978-1-4244-5824-0/$26.00 c 2010 IEEE

V3-791

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:25:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

And its transmission effect changes frequently along with weather. These decide it has high demand to channel coding to ensure the ordinary communication. LDPC codes, a parity-check code having high capability, can fitly satisfy the demand of free-space optical communication. In theory LDPC codes are a good choice to free-space optical communication.

III. COMMON CONSTRUCTION ANALYSIS OF LDPC CODES
LDPC codes defined by sparse parity-check matrix are a linear correction code. And the parity-check matrix H has a all-important function in next coding and decoding process. So the construction of the parity-check matrix H has a decisive effect to the capability of codes. According to different construction the parity-check matrix is divided into two groups, random parity-check matrix and structured
parity-check matrix in the LDPC codes set c n (λ , ρ ) of the
same parameter. Their constructed methods are random mode and structured mode. The sparse matrix constructed by random mode hasn’t fixed construction of codes. If we want to construct high code rate and short codes in this mode, it’s very difficult to avoid the four linear rings, and the codes we constructed aren’t the systemic form or the structured form. Although the parity-check matrix is sparse in this mode, the outcome matrix we got isn’t sparse after Gauss expurgation to H when we code. So the complexity of coding is very high, it’s O(n2), and the coder is complicated and hasn’t practicability. The common limitations in the structured mode are that preferences of the code length and the code rate aren’t flexible, we can only construct matrix H first according to structured design formulae then getting the code length and the code rate by H. But it isn’t feasible that we give out the parameter of the code length and the code rate first then designing the matrix by these parameters. That makes LDPC codes constructed by structured mode aren’t compatible with existing standard and haven’t practicability.

IV. THE IMPROVED CONSTRUCTION HALF RANDOM Ȇ-ROTATED LDPC CODES

We disassemble parity-check matrix H into
H = [ H p H d ] , H p called parity-check bit matrix is

a upper triangular submatrix of double diagonal form, and
H d called information bit matrix is a M × K matrix. For example H p of 6 × 6 is

ª1 1 0 0 0 0º

« «

0

1

1

0

0

0

» »

(1)

H

p

=

I

+

D

=

«0

« «

0

0 0

1 0

1 1

0 1

0»

0

» »

«0 0 0 0 1 1»

«

»

¬« 0 0 0 0 0 1 ¼»

I is a identity matrix, D is a matrix made by taking out

the first row of I and adding a row of all-zero vectors in the

last of I in it. We disassemble similarly code vector C

corresponded to matrix H into C = [C p C d ] . So the

relation of matrix H and code vector is

HCT = [H p

H

d

ªCp ]«¬Cd

º » ¼

=

H pCp

+ HdCd

=0

(2)

From (2) we can get

H pC p = v = H dCd

(3)

C p =[H p ]−1 ⋅v =U p ⋅v mod(2)

(4)

U p is a upper triangular matrix, and v is called
projection vector [3][4]. So the process of calculation code by information vector and parity-check matrix H is that first,
we calculate v by (3) formula according to C d and H d ; second, v and C p are vectors which length is M, U p a

upper triangular matrix, so the process of calculation C p
by (4) formula is
Cp(M) = v(M)

Cp(i) = v(i) +Cp(i +1) (i = M −1,M −2,...1,)

(5)

We also can improve ʌ-rotated code to extense irregular

ʌ-rotated code by changing the construction of parity-check

matrix, for example figure 3.

Figure3. The check matrix of representative extense irregular code when ʌ-rotated matrix is 4m×8m
V. THE CAPABILITY EMULATION ANALYSIS
We compare the capability of ʌ-rotated LDPC code and Mackay random LDPC code with OOK modulation in AWGN channel, for example figure 4, when code rate is 1/2, information bit length is similar, and error code rate is 10-6. We find the capability of ʌ-rotated LDPC code is better than the capability of Mackay random LDPC code. Figure 5 is the capability comparison of short codes when index vectors are fixed and code rate is 1/2[5].

V3-792 2010 2nd International Conference on Future Computer and Communication

[Volume 3]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:25:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and extense irregular ʌ-rotated code with parameter [126,18,119,4,12,7,3] with OOK modulation in AWGN
channel[6]. We can see the capability of extense irregular ʌ-rotated code is better obviously than the capability of ʌ-rotated code.

Figure4. The capability compare of ʌ-rotated code and random code

Figure6. Capability compare of random code, ʌ-rotated code, and extense code

Figure5. Short code capability compare when code rate is 1/2
Figure 6 shows the capability comparison of Mackay random code whose information bit length is 504 and whose code rate is 1/2, ʌ-rotated code with parameter [126,18,119],

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes [J].IRE Trans Information Theory,IT-8, no. 1, January 1962:21-28.

[2] D. J. C. Mackay .Gallager Codes that is better than Turbo Codes. Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Communication, September 1998.

[3] Rich Echard,Shih-Chun Chang.The -rotation Low-Density Parity-Check codes [C].GLOBECOM 2001-IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001, (1): 980-984.

[4]

Rich Echard,Shih-Chun Chang.Deterministic

-rotation

low-density parity-check codes[J].Electronics Letters,9th may

2002,38(10).

[5] Rich Echard , Shih-Chun Chang.Design Considerations Leading to the Development of Good -Rotation LDPC Codes[J].IEEE COMMUNICATI0NS LETTERS,2005,9(5), 233-236.

[6] Rich Echard,Shih-Chun Chang.The Extended Irregular -Rotation

LDPC

Codes[J].

IEEE

COMMUNICATI0N

LETTERS,2003,7(5):230-233.

[Volume 3]

2010 2nd International Conference on Future Computer and Communication

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:25:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V3-793

