IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

1083

VLSI Implementation of a High-Throughput Soft-Bit-Flipping Decoder for Geometric LDPC Codes
Junho Cho, Member, IEEE, Jonghong Kim, and Wonyong Sung, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—VLSI-based decoding of geometric low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes using the sum–product or min-sum algorithms is known to be very difficult due to large memory requirement and high interconnection complexity caused by high variable and column degrees. In this paper, a low-complexity high-performance algorithm is introduced for decoding of such high-weight LDPC codes. The developed soft-bit-flipping (SBF) algorithm operates in a similar way to the bit-flipping (BF) algorithm but further utilizes reliability of estimates to improve error performance. A hybrid decoding scheme comprised of the BF and SBF algorithms is also proposed to shorten the decoding time. Parallel and pipelined VLSI architecture is developed to increase the throughput without consuming much chip area. The (1057, 813) and (273, 191) projective-geometry LDPC codes are used for performance evaluation, and the former is designed in VLSI.
Index Terms—Bit flipping (BF), finite geometry, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, projective geometry (PG), soft BF (SBF).
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes have been of great interest since late 1990s due to the capacity-approaching error performance [1]–[4]. As LDPC codes are recently used for many high bandwidth applications, VLSI-based implementation of the codes has been of very high interest. The soft-decision-based sum-product algorithm (SPA) with infinite precision [5], [6] and the hard-decision-based bit-flipping (BF) algorithm with 1-bit precision [2] are the two extreme counterparts, which were developed in the earliest stage of the LDPC history. The SPA is generally known to show the best error performance but is not easily implemented in hardware because of its high complexity, whereas the BF algorithm with low complexity exhibits far worse error performance than the SPA. They have yielded many variants that attempt to overcome their relative weaknesses.
The LDPC codes are categorized into several classes according to the construction method. Among them, projective geometry (PG)-based LDPC codes, also known as difference-set cyclic
Manuscript received September 29, 2009; revised January 05, 2010 and March 08, 2010; accepted March 08, 2010. First published May 10, 2010; current version published May 21, 2010. This work was supported in part by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST), Republic of Korea, under the Brain Korea 21 Project and in part by the National Research Foundation funded by the Korea government (MEST) under Grant 20090075770. This work was recommended by Associate Editor C.-C. Wang.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea (e-mail: juno@dsp. snu.ac.kr; jhkim@dsp.snu.ac.kr; wysung@snu.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2010.2047743

codes, show good error performance with various decoding algorithms [7]. The PG-LDPC codes have cyclic or quasi-cyclic code structure that leads to regular encoder and decoder implementations. Note that the cyclic or quasi-cyclic code structure has various implementation advantages, such as encoding with linear feedback shift registers. The PG-LDPC codes have large minimum distance that prevents the occurrence of error floor. The error floor is, in many cases, considered a serious disadvantage of well-performing random LDPC codes compared to the arithmetic codes, such as Bose–ChaudhuriHocquenghem and Reed–Solomon codes. The PG-LDPC codes with these excellent properties, however, have been out of practical concern due to their large row and column weights that make the hardware implementation infeasible with the high-performance soft-decision decoding algorithms, such as the SPA and min-sum algorithm (MSA).
We have developed the soft BF (SBF) algorithm to take advantage of both SPA and BF algorithms in [8]. The developed SBF algorithm enables a low-cost implementation of high-weight LDPC codes, such as the PG-LDPC codes, while sustaining good performance close to that of the SPA. The SBF algorithm follows the basic structure of the BF algorithm to reduce the interconnection complexity and the amount of computation, and it applies reliability estimation that imitates the SPA to bridge the error performance gap. A hybrid decoding scheme using both BF and SBF algorithms has been also proposed to shorten decoding time [8]. In this paper, the SBF is introduced with more descriptions for determining initial flipping thresholds, and the hybrid decoding scheme is elaborated in more details. Then, an efficient hybrid SBF decoder is implemented in VLSI for the (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code. The developed hybrid SBF decoder is parallelized and pipelined to increase the throughput. Simulation results demonstrate that the hybrid SBF decoder can achieve a peak throughput of 17.37 Gbits/s with only 7.4- area when implemented in 0.18CMOS technology. It shows 0.2-dB close performance to the floating-point SPA at a bit error rate of . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first VLSI design for the practical use of high-weight PG-LDPC codes.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces various LDPC decoding algorithms. The SBF algorithm is described in Section III, and the hybrid decoding scheme is presented in Section IV. Architecture of the developed hybrid SBF decoder is then illustrated in Section V. The results of VLSI implementation are shown in Section VI. Finally, concluding remarks are made in Section VII.

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

TABLE I THRESHOLD VALUES OF THE 4-BIT SBF ALGORITHM FOR
THE (1057, 813) PG-LDPC CODE

II. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHMS AND MARGINALIZATION

Fig. 1. Distribution of the flipping function for (dashed line) correct and (solid
Many message-passing-based algorithms have been devel- line) erroneous variables and the corresponding flipping threshold b ’s. oped for decoding of LDPC codes, including the SPA [5], [6],

MSA [6], [9], [10], BF [2], and weighted BF (WBF) [7] algorithms. These algorithms exchange estimates of nodes iteratively between variable and check nodes along the edges defined by the Tanner graph, thereby augmenting reliability of the estimation at every iteration. Among the various algorithms, the SPA is considered to show the best error performance but also demands the largest implementation complexity in terms of interconnection, as well as computation. The SPA computes an outgoing message of a node along an adjacent edge using all incoming messages, excluding the message along edge . This exclusion of the incoming message, called marginalization, ensures that only extrinsic information is exploited to obtain new estimation [4]. This is known to be an important property to improve error performance but is a primary factor to induce high computation and interconnection complexities. The MSA is an approximate algorithm of the SPA, which has smaller

with marginalization, different messages need to be stored and delivered to different neighbors, whereas without marginalization, universal messages are broadcasted from a node. Therefore, for PG-LDPC codes with relatively high weights, marginalization makes their implementation infeasible; e.g., the (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code has variable and check node degrees of 33, and the (4161, 3431) PG-LDPC code has those of 64. Pseudomarginalization proposed by the MWBF algorithm seems a proper remedy for such high-weight LDPC codes. When estimating the next status of variable nodes using pseudomarginalization, the incoming messages from check nodes are subtracted by a particular amount of received values, thereby quite alleviating accumulation of intrinsic information through iterations while demanding almost the same memory regardless of the node degree.

computational but still large interconnection complexities. The

BF algorithm generally refers to a very simple hard-decision algorithm, which removes marginalization from either the Gal-

III. SBF ALGORITHM

lager’s algorithm A or B. While the SPA and the MSA propa-

gate the probability of nodes repeatedly in the real number do-

main, the BF algorithm only changes the hard-decision values

reflecting the probability. More specifically, denoting the vari-

able node degree as , the variable nodes with or more unsat-

isfied parity-check sums are inverted in the BF algorithm, where

the threshold is fixed at

(Gallager algorithm A) or it

can vary during decoding (Gallager algorithm B). The BF al-

gorithm has significantly smaller complexities but shows much

worse error performance than the SPA or the MSA. The WBF,

modified WBF (MWBF) [11], and improved MWBF (IMWBF)

[12] algorithms originate from the BF algorithm and try to im-

prove the poor error performance of the BF algorithm by as-

signing weights for check nodes, which represent reliability of

hard decision.

Although marginalization is an important operation to im-

The SBF algorithm follows the basic structure of the

MWBF algorithm employing pseudomarginalization but uses

refined flipping criteria over soft-valued variable nodes to

achieve better error performance [8]. Let us assume the binary

phase-shift keying modulation over an additive white Gaussian

noise channel. The weight of the MWBF is then defined by

for check node and that of the IMWBF

by

, applying marginalization, where

,

, and denote the set of neighboring variable

nodes of check node ,

excluding the variable node

, and the th received variable, respectively. Note that the

log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the received signal is com-

puted by

, where is the noise variance. The weight

marginalization adopted in the IMWBF algorithm is not used

in this paper because it causes too much hardware increase

for PG-LDPC codes. Moreover, to calculate the weight, the

prove error performance, it entails additional computations. summation is taken over all neighboring variable nodes rather

Furthermore, marginalization induces times larger memory, than finding the minimum of them. It is because the minimum

where denotes the number of edges per node. It is because, is only suitable for accurate reliability computation based on

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A HIGH-THROUGHPUT SBF DECODER FOR GEOMETRIC LDPC CODES

1085

Fig. 2. FER of the (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code under various decoding algorithms.

Fig. 3. (Dashed line) Frame and (solid line) bit error rates of the (273, 191) PG-LDPC code.

LLR and exact marginalization. Thus, in the SBF algorithm, the weight for the th check node is computed by

(1)
The flipping function for variable node is the same as those of the MWBF and IMWBF algorithms, which is defined by

(2)

where ,

, and denote the set

of neighboring check nodes of variable node , the th syn-

(Fdiga.sh4e.d

Elivnoelu)tio3n:5

of the FER through iterations and (solid line) 4 dB.

when

E =N

=

drome component, and a nonnegative integer constant, respec-

tively. The flipping function indicates the extent of disagree- represented in a sign-magnitude form except 0 for ease of

ment to the current hard-decision bit of variable node pro- implementation. The second method is to reflect the flipping

vided by the soft-valued parity-check sums. Note that all the function on the soft-valued variable nodes with more flipping

constituent computations of (2) can be performed within vari- thresholds rather than on the hard-decision bits with just one

able node , where the subtraction of

describes pseudo- threshold, as in the MWBF and IMWBF algorithms. The SBF

marginalization.

algorithm employs four levels of flipping strength, namely,

In order to improve error performance without exact marginal- strong flip, weak flip, maintaining, and strengthening. They are

ization in both variable and check nodes, the SBF algo- determined by the three flipping thresholds of

.

rithm adopts the following two methods. First is the nonuni- The strong and weak flips imply the shifts of a signal toward

form quantization. Suppose that the variable nodes are quan- the direction of its opposite sign. Therefore, they are not

tized into bits using the nonuniform quantization levels of “flips” in a strict sense, but we used those terms to inherit the

and so are the check nodes using conventional terms employed in the modified BF algorithms.

. Although it is simple to find effi- A similar method has been proposed by Palanki et al. [13],

cient quantization levels for the SPA or the MSA because in which the three-state BF algorithm allows the erased value

they operate in the exact probability domain, it seems not for the variables and deactivation of parity-check sums. The

analytical to calculate them for the simplified BF-based algo- wider reflection of the flipping function increases the utilization

rithms. Therefore, in this paper, good quantization levels are ratio of the incoming information obtained at each iteration

roughly found by simulation, where the results for

are of decoding. Moreover, by reflecting the flipping function

depicted in Table I. Good error performance is achieved when not on the hard-decision bits but on the soft-valued variable

the variables with small magnitudes are assigned with fine nodes, the SBF enables seamless propagation of information

quantization levels. Given the initial quantization levels, small through decoding iterations, as the SPA and MSA. Note that,

changes are made to each level by either changing more or in the MWBF and IMWBF algorithms, only one or a few

reserving the older value, and we keep track of good levels, elements of the hard-decision vector that have the largest

yielding better error performance. The quantized values are flipping function are inverted.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 5. (Dashed line) Frame and (solid line) bit error rates of the (1057, 813) Fig. 7. Bit error rate of the (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code under hybrid decoding

PG-LDPC code. Iteration limits are set to 40.

schemes.

Fig. 8. Average number of iterations under hybrid decoding schemes.

Fig. 6. (Dashed line) Average number of iterations and (solid line) throughput for the decoding of the (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code. Iteration limits are set to 40.
Finally, the SBF algorithm is carried out as follows:

Step 3. Variable node update:

For each variable node

, compute the flipping

function defined by (2). Then, according to the

flipping function, update the variable node with SBF

as follows.

a) (Strong flip) If

,

Initialization:

Set the iteration number to zero. Quantize all variable

nodes using .

b) (Weak flip) If

,

Step 1. Check node update:

For each check node

, compute the syndrome

and the weight , and then, quantize the weight

c) (Maintain) If

,

using

.

Step 2. Decision:

If all the parity checks are satisfied, i.e., if all the

syndromes are zero, the hard-decision vector of the

variable sequence is produced as the decoded word,

and finish the decoding. If is larger than the predefined

limit

, finish the decoding with a decoding failure

message.

d) (Strengthen) If

,

If no flipping occurs, adjust the flipping thresholds

and

for some positive

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A HIGH-THROUGHPUT SBF DECODER FOR GEOMETRIC LDPC CODES

1087

Fig. 9. Serial architecture of a hybrid SBF decoder.

integer . Increment the iteration number

, messages, which deteriorates the error-correcting capability

and then, go to Step 1.

[10]. Meanwhile, as was observed earlier in [13] for the (255,

The three flipping thresholds , , and are initially set by

the predetermined values. By evaluating for a large number

of correct and erroneous variable nodes separately, the appro-

priate initial values for ’s can be obtained, with which the

correct ones are flipped less and the erroneous ones are flipped

more at the first iteration. An example distribution of the flip-

ping function and the corresponding ’s are shown in Fig. 1.

Then, the integer constants in (2) and in Step 3 are ob-

tained by simulations to achieve the best error performance.

Employing the quantization levels given in Table I, the param-

eters are determined to

,

, and

.

The frame error rates (FERs) of the (1057, 813) PG-LDPC

code under the SBF algorithm with various quantization levels

are shown in Fig. 2. For comparison, also shown are the error

performances of the SPA, WBF, and IMWBF algorithms.

The SBF algorithm is tested using fixed-point computations,

whereas other algorithms are based on floating-point arith-

127) Euclidean-geometry LDPC code, which is another class of geometric LDPC codes, the primary reason of the good performance of the BF-based algorithm seems to be due to the large number of redundant parity-check sums (i.e., large variable node degrees) of the geometric LDPC codes. Note that LDPC codes with large variable node degrees, on the other hand, make the implementation of marginalization-based SPA and MSA much costly. Moreover, note that any error floor is not observed until near the FER of with as small as 2 bits of quantization, when decoded by the SBF algorithm. When tested under the (273, 191) PG-LDPC code with corresponding
, , ’s, and quantization levels, the SBF decoding also shows good error performance, as shown in Fig. 3. All geometric codes have good structural properties and large weights since they are constructed based on finite geometries with just different parameters. Therefore, it is expected that the SBF algorithm generally shows good performance near that of the SPA when operated for this special class of LDPC codes.

metic. It is noticeable that the 6-bit SBF even outperforms the SPA at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region with the

IV. HYBRID DECODING WITH BF AND SBF ALGORITHMS

same iteration limit of 200. Heuristic algorithms often show The SBF algorithm flips the variable nodes that exhibit almost

better error performance than the numerically accurate SPA the largest flipping function, as explained in Step 3 of the algo-

at high SNR region because the approximate (inaccurate) rithm description. Although such safe and conservative change

computations seem less affected by the correlation between of variable nodes toward the opposite direction improves the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 10. Flow chart of the hybrid SBF decoding process.

error performance, more iterations are required for decoding hybrid SBF decoding scheme shows fairly higher decoding

convergence. The error performances as a function of the it- throughput than the SBF decoding near

of 4.5–7.0

eration number are shown in Fig. 4, where the fixed flipping dB. Meanwhile, when

is below 4.0 dB or beyond 7.5

threshold

is used for the BF algorithm. Even though the dB, the decoding throughput of the SBF only and the hybrid

error performance with a large number of iterations improves by SBF schemes are almost same. It is because the BF algorithm

increasing the number of quantization bits , the decoding con- barely succeeds in decoding below 4.0 dB (see Fig. 2) and

vergence becomes slower because a small number of variable the SBF algorithm reaches decoding convergence as fast as

nodes change their values by at most two among the dynamic the BF algorithm beyond 7.5 dB. When the SNR is larger

range of . On the other hand, the BF algorithm inverts a larger than 4.1 dB, which is the case of concern where the BER is

number of variables aggressively with a fixed threshold, thereby smaller than roughly , at least 1.05 Gbits/s of throughput

achieving faster convergence.

is accomplished. The throughput increases up to 17.37 Gbits/s

The slow-decoding-convergence problem of the SBF algo- if received words are perfectly error free.

rithm can be alleviated by two-stage hybrid decoding; it first The error performance and decoding time of the hybrid de-

attempts the fast BF decoding with a fixed threshold and a coding schemes with various combinations of decoding itera-

very small iteration limit and then employs the SBF decoding tions are shown in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. When we conduct

in the case of decoding failure with the BF decoding. In this the BF decoding for less than three iterations, the BF decoding

paper, compromising the error performance, convergence fails frequently, and the decoding time does not change much

speed, and implementation cost, the number of quantization by the hybrid decoding (see the “ ” marked curve in Fig. 8);

bits is determined to

. Frame and bit error rates of the else, if we assign more than five iterations for the BF decoding,

(1057, 813) PG-LDPC code under three decoding schemes the reduced number of iterations for the SBF decoding deterio-

given

are shown in Fig. 5, where the hybrid SBF rates the overall error performance (see the “ ” marked curve in

decoding scheme assigns 4 and 36 iterations for the BF and Fig. 7). If we vary the number of iterations for the BF decoding

SBF stages, respectively. The average number of iterations and within three to five while maintaining the total number of it-

the throughput for these decoding schemes are shown in Fig. 6. erations for the hybrid decoding, almost the same performances

The decoding throughput is estimated by simulation based on are observed for both the error rate and the decoding time. These

the developed four-stage pipelined hybrid SBF decoder with a combinations of iterations seem good compromises between the

parallel factor of 64 and a clock frequency of 345 MHz. The error and time performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A HIGH-THROUGHPUT SBF DECODER FOR GEOMETRIC LDPC CODES

1089

Fig. 11. Structure of (a) VPU and (b) CPU.

V. ARCHITECTURE OF THE HYBRID SBF DECODER

When this output is not a final decoding result but an interme-

A. Serial Architecture

diate word, it is nullified with an output disable signal. Similar to the case of the input buffer, the sign bit of the current

A serial hybrid SBF decoder is developed in this paper as variable node fills the emptied output buffer in a FIFO manner,

shown in Fig. 9. The decoder consists of an input buffer (Ibuff), a which will be the output in the next check node update step.

rollback buffer (Rbuff), an output buffer (Obuff), variable nodes, If the current word being decoded is a legitimate codeword, all

check nodes, a flip unit, a variable node processing unit (VPU), parity-check sums are identified as satisfied after the check

and a check node processing unit (CPU), where the buffers and node update step, and the next received word can be fetched in

nodes are realized by shift registers. The 1-bit BF decoding and a single clock cycle because all the required data are already

4-bit SBF decoding can be simply implemented in shared hard- stored in the suitable position. In this way, i.e., by overlapping

ware since they are based on almost the same algorithm with the input and output (IO) buffering with the check node up-

just different precision.

date and by fetching a received word in a single clock cycle, a

Once an -bit word is transmitted to the developed decoder, very high throughput can be attained, particularly at high SNR

the received analog signals are quantized using the boundary where only a few iterations are needed for decoding success. If

’s and stored in the 4-bit input buffers in a sequential any of the check nodes are not satisfied, the variable node up-

manner by shifting the registers bit by bit (thus taking clock date step follows. In this step, the CPU adds up the parity bits

cycles). Then, the variable nodes are initialized in a single clock of the connected 33 check nodes and compares the result with

cycle by fetching the sign bits of the input buffer in a fully the fixed flipping threshold

, thereby generating a flip-

parallel manner (see Fig. 10 for detailed decoding flow). In the ping signal for the corresponding variable node. The sign bit of

following check node update step, the VPU computes a parity each variable node is updated by reflecting this signal. After the

check using only the sign bits of the connected 33 variable nodes aforementioned first iteration of the check and variable node up-

and stores it to the corresponding check node, again in a serial date steps, the check node update step is operated without filling

manner. The upper part of the VPU shown in Fig. 11(a) is used the magnitude of the variable nodes and without input buffering

in this step. While the check nodes are being updated, the input until four iterations assigned to the BF decoding are consumed.

buffer transfers its sign to the rollback buffer and its magnitude This can be implemented by clock gating.

to the variable node for the case of BF decoding failure. At the If the BF decoding fails, the sign bits of the variable nodes

same time, the next received word fills the emptied input buffer are replaced by the contents of the rollback buffer. It takes one

in a first-in first-out (FIFO) manner. Also in this step, the cycle to complete the rollback, as the initialization step. Now,

1-bit output buffers containing the previously decoded word de- the variable nodes contain the soft-valued received word. Uti-

liver the outputs with a flag of either decoding success or failure, lizing all 4-bit precision and all hardware resources of VPU and

which was determined in the previous check node update step. CPU shown in Fig. 11, the SBF decoding is conducted. Let us

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1090

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 12. Structure of variable nodes when the parallel factor is 32.

Fig. 13. Structure of the threshold adaptation unit.

denote the th 4-bit variable node as

, where is the input from the check nodes, which adds one to the magnitude

inverted 1-bit hard-decision value and is the 3-bit reliability when the sign is nonnegative. In our implementation, however,

of that hard-decision value. Then, in the check node update step, the dynamic range mismatch is simply compensated by sepa-

the VPU generates 4-bit parity checks in a sign-magnitude form; rately adding the number of nonnegative check nodes connected

the most significant 1 bit representing the inverted hard-deci- to the CPU, as well as adding the check nodes as they are, as

sion parity check is obtained by inverting the modulo-2 sum shown in Fig. 11(b). In this way, the complexity of conditional

, and the remaining 3 bits is calculated by the or- additions can be quite alleviated. The lower part of Fig. 11(b)

dinary sum

, followed by the quantization with the shows the hardware for threshold adaptation. If no flipping oc-

threshold ’s [see Fig. 11(a)].

curs in the variable node update step, even though there is at least

The result is then formatted to the 4-bit two’s complement one unsatisfied parity check, is modified to the maximum re-

representation before being stored in the check node. The two’s liability value that has been detected in the last variable node

complement format is efficient for check nodes, whereas the update step, and also, is modified to

. Both in the

sign-magnitude format is advantageous for variable nodes. It VPU and CPU, the Wallace tree and carry look-ahead adders

is because the CPU requires the signed summation of check are employed to minimize the critical path delay caused by the

nodes, while the VPU sums up the absolute values of variable large input addition.

nodes. The format conversion unit is attached at the last stage As described so far, the BF decoding can be easily imple-

of the VPU rather than at the first stage of the CPU because the mented on the SBF decoder. Therefore, the hybrid SBF de-

critical path is in the CPU. As a result of VPU operations, the coding is a very efficient way to improve the throughput with

check nodes obtain 4-bit values which have dynamic range of only a small increase in the implementation cost.

and [0, 7]. However, the 4-bit SBF algorithm requires

the dynamic range of

and [1, 8] for conducting the B. Parallel Architecture

variable node update step. Therefore, a straightforward imple- The serial decoder can be converted to a parallel one by

mentation of the CPU requires conditional additions for every simply duplicating the VPU, CPU (except the threshold

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A HIGH-THROUGHPUT SBF DECODER FOR GEOMETRIC LDPC CODES

1091

Fig. 14. Structure of (a) VPU and (b) CPU with four pipeline stages.

adaptor), flip unit, and corresponding interconnection networks in Fig. 12. Note that the number of shift registers for buffers

times, where denotes the parallel factor. If the VPU of the and nodes is almost unchanged by parallelization. Therefore,

serial decoder

is connected to a set of variable nodes although the shift registers dominate the total cell area in the

, the th VPU of the parallel decoder

serial architecture, the portion of the computational units for

should be connected to

. VPUs and CPUs becomes larger as increases. It is also ex-

The buffers and nodes are vertically grouped by elements pected that the power consumption in VPUs and CPUs becomes

to deliver proper messages to the VPUs and CPUs, where an more significant with increasing , since the signal transitions

example of variable nodes with a parallel factor of 32 is shown in shift registers are not affected by . In the developed parallel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010
TABLE II IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

Measured at a BER of 10 y Error performance is measured with 50 iterations, while the decoding throughput is measured with 16 iterations. z Error performance is measured with 32 iterations, while the decoding throughput is measured with 16 iterations.

SBF decoder, there is a unified threshold adaptation unit, as

shown in Fig. 13. Although the initialization and rollback

time is not changed, the time to complete the check node and

variable node update steps is reduced to

clock cycles by

the parallelization.

The pipelining technique is applied to the parallel architecture

to increase the clock frequency. For the four-stage pipelining,

the Wallace tree should be partitioned into several subtrees, two

pipeline registers are inserted between the front- and back-ends

of the entire Wallace tree, and another pipeline register lies be-

fore the quantization unit in the VPU and before the threshold

adaptation unit in the CPU (see Fig. 14).

With the -stage pipelining, the check node and variable node

processing times are increased by clock cycles. Pipelining

is required also in the threshold adaptation unit, the path delay

of which increases at the rate of

. For the threshold

adaptation unit, many pipeline stages can be inserted if required, Fig. 15. Layout of the hybrid SBF decoder.

since the modified threshold values will be used after

clock cycles.

The developed hybrid SBF decoder (Fig. 15) shows compa-

VI. VLSI IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH OTHER WORKS

rable error performance with the (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code when compared to the state-of-the-art decoders presented in [14]–[17] using the well-known structured LDPC codes. With

A hybrid SBF decoder was synthesized with Synopsys a parallel factor of 64 and the four-stage pipeline technique, the

Design Compiler using the Chartered Semiconductor 0.18-

developed decoder attained 17.37 Gbits/s of peak throughput

5LM CMOS standard cell library. Synopsys Astro has been when there is no error in the received frames. On the other

used for placement and routing, and PrimeTime for static timing hand, if every decoding trial fails, the throughput decreases

and power estimation. Listed in Table II are the post-layout to 253 Mbits/s by consuming all 40 iterations. The developed

simulation results compared to the state-of-the-art decoders. decoder demonstrates 1.05 Gbits/s when

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A HIGH-THROUGHPUT SBF DECODER FOR GEOMETRIC LDPC CODES

1093

The decoders in [14]–[16] show quite higher throughput and that in [17] presents comparable throughput, but they require much larger chip area. Since the throughput of the proposed LDPC decoder can be increased almost proportionally by raising the parallel factor, there is a room to increase the throughput by investing more chip area. In this sense, the developed decoder seems to be very competitive when comparing the maximum throughput per chip area. The developed chip, however, does not show good minimum throughput. This is partly because the iteration limit of this chip is set to 40, while that of the others is 16. The minimum throughput of the developed decoder increases to 656 Mbits/s when the iteration limit is reduced to 16. In this paper, the iteration limit is set to the number yielding approximately twice the decoding failures compared to the asymptotic case when a sufficiently large number of iterations are given (see Fig. 4). However, in some prior works, such as [15] and [17], it seems that the error performance is measured with a large iteration limit and the decoder is implemented with a small one to meet the minimum throughput. In this case, the implemented decoder chip may show worse performance than expected. In addition, the developed SBF decoder chip does not employ the layered scheduling that can operate both VPU and CPU simultaneously. If the minimum throughput is considered very important, this design can be improved by employing the layered decoding algorithm. Another remark should be made that, in many works, the number of clock cycles required for IO (i.e., the time to output a decoded frame and fill the memories or registers with a received frame) has not been considered when estimating the decoding throughput. Since the lengths of LDPC codes used in [14]–[17] are thousands of bits, the IO time would much reduce the demonstrated throughput. In this paper, we implemented the IO buffers that can shorten the data fetching time to a single clock cycle, and the IO time is estimated in computing the throughput. Without these IO buffers, the chip area shrinks by approximately 1.0
(13.5%) at the expense of reduced throughput. Most importantly, this chip demonstrates the implementation feasibility of LDPC codes with large variable and check node degrees, while practical LDPC codes have only employed small variable and check node degrees for limiting the chip size. The implementation feasibility of large-weight LDPC codes can lead to the discovery of better practical codes.

64-way parallel and four-stage pipelined architecture could achieve a peak throughput of 17.37 Gbits/s with 7.4- area. It provides 0.2-dB close performance to the floating-point SPA at a bit error rate of .
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum–product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[8] J. Cho and W. Sung, “High-performance and low-complexity decoding of high-weight LDPC codes,” (in Korean) J. Korea Inf. Commun. Soc., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 498–504, May 2009.
[9] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[10] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[11] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[12] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[13] R. Palanki, M. P. C. Fossorier, and J. S. Yedidia, “Iterative decoding of multiple-step majority logic decodable codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1099–1102, Jun. 2007.
[14] L. Liu and C. J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
[15] C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Sha, L. Li, and J. Lin, “Flexible LDPC decoder design for multi-Gb/s applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 116–124, Jan. 2010, to be published.
[16] H. Zhong, W. Xu, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Area-efficient min-sum decoder design for high-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117–4122, Dec. 2007.
[17] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The SBF algorithm adopts the pseudomarginalization scheme for hardware complexity reduction but employs nonuniform and multistrength BF techniques to improve error performance. The hardware reduction is more prominent for large-weight LDPC codes, such as geometric LDPC codes, when compared with the sum-product or min-sum decoding algorithms. In order to improve the convergence speed, a hybrid decoding scheme has also been developed. When implemented by a 0.18CMOS technology, a 4-bit hybrid SBF decoder employing

Junho Cho (M’10) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2004, 2006, and 2010, respectively.
He was a Visiting Researcher with the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, from November 2008 to September 2009. He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher with Seoul National University. His research interests are the design and implementation of error-correcting codes, and signal processing for reliable storage devices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Jonghong Kim received the B.S. degree in electronic and information engineering from the Seoul National University of Technology, Seoul, Korea, in 2007 and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering and computer science from Seoul National University, Seoul, in 2009, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include VLSI implementation of error correction systems and its optimization.

Wonyong Sung (S’84–M’87–SM’07) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of California, Santa Barbara, in 1987. During his Ph.D. course, he studied vector and multiprocessor implementation of signal processing algorithms.
He has been a Faculty Member with Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, since 1989. He was a member of the editorial board for the Signal Processing Journal, Elsevier, from 2007 to 2009. His main research interests are the development of VLSI systems and parallel processing software for signal processing. His research topics also include fixed-point optimization and speech signal processing. Dr. Sung was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS II from 2000 to 2001. He is a member of the VLSI Systems and Applications Technical Committee of the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society and the Chair of the Design and Implementation of Signal Processing Systems Technical Committee of the IEEE Signal Processing Society. He was the General Chair of the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS) 2003 and a Technical Program Cochair of SiPS 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

