40th IEEE International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic

Switching Activity in Stochastic Decoders

Vincent C. Gaudet Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Alberta Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4 Canada
vgaudet@ece.ualberta.ca

Warren J. Gross Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
McGill University Montreal, QC H3A 2A7 Canada
wjgross@ece.mcgill.ca

Abstract—Stochastic iterative decoders are a recently introduced hardware-oriented class of message-passing algorithms for ultra-low complexity error-correcting decoders. We show that dynamic power consumption in stochastic decoders is exposed at the algorithmic level and can be evaluated from the values of messages passed on the code’s factor graph. This observation leads to a method for evaluating the relative dynamic power consumption of stochastic decoders as early as the code design stage. We propose a method based on density evolution that can be used to compare code ensembles in terms of their decoding energy per information bit. We note that despite using a stochastic signaling scheme, stochastic decoders converge to a codeword and stop consuming dynamic power. Results illustrate that significant differences in power consumption can be identified at the code design stage and tradeoffs can be exploited before designing a specific implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [1] [2] are a family of capacity-approaching error-correcting codes. Over the past several years they have been a major focus of communications research and are now included in several commercial communications standards, such as WiMAX, 10GBASE-T, and DVB-S2.
Due to the requirements to build decoders for these standards, and to the power consumption restrictions of products that will use these decoders, estimation of the power consumption requirements during the decoder design stage is becoming increasingly important. Previous work on asynchronous LDPC decoders [3] and on stochastic LDPC decoders [4] have been published at ISMVL. Notably absent from the literature is any work that incorporates decoder power requirements early in the error control code design phase. In this work we show that the class of decoding algorithms, known as stochastic decoding [4]–[7] and with implementation results in [8], [9], exhibits the property that the power consumption of the decoder is exposed at the code design stage. We will then use that property to evaluate tradeoffs in code design with power consumption in mind.
Power consumption of digital integrated circuits can be categorized into two components: static power and

dynamic power [10]. In this work, we focus on estimating signal activity in a decoder, which is directly related to its dynamic power consumption. For stochastic decoders, signal activity statistics can be predicted at code design time without detailed simulations of the decoder circuits. In [11] we postulated that a computeraided design tool for dynamic power estimation could be developed, which would exploit density evolution [12] techniques, and which was used to generate initial simulation results. Power consumption tradeoffs could thus be evaluated far earlier in the design process than what is currently available, possibly as early as the code design stage, where density evolution is often used to compare code ensembles. Results of a similar technique applied to the design of message formats in sum-product decoders were published in [13]. In this paper we formalize the method and provide new results and insights into dynamic power in stochastic decoders.
This paper is organized as follows. A review of stochastic decoding on factor graphs is given in Section II. Section III describes how density evolution (cycle-free decoding) is used to predict data values in decoding and establishes a link with the dynamic power consumption in CMOS circuits. Results from density evolution studies are presented. Finally, Section IV concludes this paper.
II. STOCHASTIC DECODING ON FACTOR GRAPHS
A. Factor Graphs
LDPC decoding algorithms work on the factor graph of the code, which is a graphical representation of the code’s n × (n − k) parity check matrix, where n is the number of codeword bits, and k is the number of transmitted information bits. Therefore, there are n − k parity bits and the rate R of the code is k/n.
A factor graph consists of n variable nodes that represent codeword bits and n − k check nodes that represent the code’s parity check constraints (one for each row of the parity check matrix). The factor graph includes an edge between a variable node and a check node if the specified variable is part of the parity check constraint corresponding to the check node, or in other

0195-623X/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE

167

DOI 10.1109/ISMVL.2010.39

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:29:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Example factor graph for a (3,6)-regular n = 16, k = 8 code.
words, if there is a corresponding ‘1’ in the parity check matrix. Figure 1 shows a factor graph for a code with n = 16 and k = 8. The variable nodes are shown on top and the check nodes are shown on the bottom.
A regular LDPC code has the same edge degree for all variable nodes, denoted dv, and the same edge degree for all parity check nodes, denoted dc. Such a code is usually referred to as a (dv, dc)-regular LDPC code of length n. In contrast, an irregular LDPC code has variable and check nodes of varying degrees, and the distribution of variable and check node degrees is specified. The distribution of node degrees affects the error correcting properties of an LDPC codes, and is thus a key parameter.
Decoding of LDPC codes by the sum-product algorithm proceeds by passing messages along the edges of the graph between the variable and check nodes in several rounds or iterations. What is important in the context of this paper is that these messages are simply probabilities, that is, positive real numbers between zero and one. For convenience, the log-likelihood ratio (LLR), L = ln (p(0)/p(1)) is often used instead of the probabilities themselves. A survey of factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm is given in [14].
B. Stochastic Decoding
Stochastic decoding is a recently introduced factor graph-based decoding algorithm that has the potential for very low-complexity decoder implementations. Stochastic decoders were first introduced in [5] and have been recently shown to be a viable alternative to the sumproduct algorithm for decoding large LDPC codes [7]. Stochastic decoders have an extremely simple hardware implementation as demonstrated in [8], [9].
The key idea in stochastic decoding is a stochastic message format (sometimes known as pulse density modulation) to represent the messages in the factor graph, which enables very low-complexity processing hardware in the nodes of the graph. Recall that the messages passed on the edges of the graph are simply probabilities. Stochastic decoding represents a probability p by a Bernoulli sequence as a random sequence of bits where the frequency of ones in the sequence is p. For instance, the probability that random variable A is

equal to 1 could be represented by the stochastic stream 0010111010. In this stream, 5 of the 10 bits are equal to 1, and the stream would be interpreted as carrying a probability message of 0.5. This message representation is not unique and any binary sequence with half of its bits being ‘1’ would represent p = 0.5. The precision of the representation increases with the length of the Bernoulli sequence. In practice, due to the robustness of the decoding algorithm, stochastic decoders do not need very high precision representations and are practical alternatives to sum-product decoders [4], [7]–[9].
This stochastic representation results in very simple node hardware. A two-input check node enforcing the parity check constraint computes a “soft-XOR” function:

p(C) = p(A)(1 − p(B)) + (1 − p(A))p(B). (1)

If the messages A, B, and C, are represented in the stochastic domain by Bernoulli sequences, then the message C calculated in (1) is generated by a two-input XOR gate with the A and B streams at its input. Similarly, check nodes of higher degree generalize to multi-input XOR-gates. A two-input variable node implements:

p(A)p(B)

p(C) =

, (2)

p(A)p(B) + (1 − p(A))(1 − p(B))

with the corresponding implementation consisting simply of a two-input AND gate, a two-input NOR gate, two inverters, and a J-K flip-flop (to do the division); an edge memory implementation, described below, is slightly more complex but computes the same output probability but ideally creates a Bernoulli output sequence whereas consecutive output bits in a J-K flip-flop implementation are not independent. Higher degree equality nodes are built out of two-input equality nodes. The simplicity of the node hardware enables fully parallel decoders, where the factor graph is explicitly laid out in silicon [9]. Fully parallel decoders offer the advantage of high throughput and low power, since the clock frequency can be kept relatively low. The routing congestion problem of fully parallel sum-product decoders is also alleviated by the bit-serial nature of the interconnection network graph, reducing the number of wires by a factor of 4 to 8x.
Stochastic decoding was originally described in [5] using a J-K flip-flop based variable node. It was noted that this variable node was prone to the “lock-up” problem where a node’s output would remain stable for many clock cycles and these values would propagate through the graph, stopping the update of the messages in the graph. This problem was addressed in [7] by the introduction of “edge memories”, a module that re-randomizes the output stream of a variable node to break correlations causing lock-up. Another technique introduced in [7] called noise-dependent scaling applies

168 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:29:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a scaling-factor to the channel input log-likelihood ratios. Both of these techniques increase switching activity in the decoder. The reader is referred to [9] for complete details on the stochastic decoding algorithm.
Due to recent developments in stochastic decoding, it now appears that this is a viable and attractive implementation technique for LDPC decoders [4], [7]–[9]. Low-power implementations will be critical for LDPC decoders to be adopted in mainstream communications devices. Therefore, power estimation is an important phase of the decoder design process. Unfortunately, for most circuits, power estimation is done late in the design process, after significant effort has been put into code design and simulation. We have come to realize that the stochastic decoding algorithm has an advantage in this respect, and that there is a direct correspondence between the message values and signaling format. This means that if we know the value of a message to be passed between nodes, we also know the number of signal transitions on that wire, which can be used to evaluate the power consumption of the decoder. For illustrative purposes, the stochastic message 0010111010 contains three 0-to-1 transitions, and the zero-to-one switching activity for the sequence is 3/9. Switching activity analysis could not be done in a conventional decoder until late in the design process. For example, at the very least, the bit-width of the messages would have to be chosen and fixed-point hardware for the nodes would have to be designed. We can use the stochastic representation that directly exposes the switching activity in the code design stage to choose code ensembles that have good switching activity.

III. POWER ESTIMATION THROUGH EVOLUTION OF SIGNAL STATISTICS

A. Dynamic Power Model

In order to formulate our decoder power consumption model we must first review where power is consumed in digital systems. From [10], the dynamic power consumption of a digital logic gate can be expressed as:

Pdyn = CLVD2Dp0→1fCLK ,

(3)

where Pdyn is the dynamic power consumption, fCLK is the clock frequency, CL is the load capacitance driven by the gate, VDD is the supply voltage, and p0→1 is the probability that the load will experience a 0-to-1 signal transition during any single clock cycle. In other words, power consumption is data-dependent.
The total dynamic power consumption of a complete system can be expressed as the sum of individual Pdyn components over all system nodes. Values of VDD and fCLK are often known (or can be closely estimated) at design time. For example, it may not be known

that a particular implementation will meet a specific fCLK target, but the target itself must be known in order for a design to meet throughput specifications. For example, for 10Gb/s decoding, block processing, length 1000 code would require a frame rate of 10Mframes/s. At 10 iterations per frame, this sets an iteration clock of 1 Miteration/s, which eventually sets the required fCLK .
The values of load capacitance, CL, for wires only become known during the physical design stage. This work focuses on the code design stage, before physical implementations are considered (note that interleaver wire length estimates can be obtained by using the placement algorithm in [15]). This is done by considering the effect of the data on the number of signal transitions, p0→1. Since the signal statistics are dependent on the signalto-noise-ratio (SNR), the power consumption is expected to vary with SNR. This has been observed before; for instance in the digital iterative decoder presented in [16], the dynamic power varied by more than a factor of three from low to high SNR. This work focuses on predicting values of p0→1 at the code design stage, to provide insight on the choice of code ensemble on power.
B. Density Evolution as a Data Predictor
Several steps are usually taken in designing an LDPC code. First, a suitable distribution of factor graph variable and check node degrees must be chosen (dv and dc for regular LDPC codes). This is usually done using a technique known as density evolution (sometimes called cycle-free decoding), which is described in greater detail below. At this point the degree distribution is usually called a code ensemble, essentially referring to a family of cycle-free LDPC codes of infinite length having the specified degree distribution. Then, once a code length has been chosen, the edges in the factor graph are selected according to the required degree distribution, and so as to satisfy some design constraint, usually related to the girth of the graph. Only then can Monte Carlo simulation be used to evaluate the bit error rate performance of a code.
Density evolution [12] predicts the probability density function (pdf) of LLR messages at the outputs of factor graph nodes, based on the pdfs of the input messages. For instance, consider a 2-input variable node using the sum-product algorithm, where the computation is an addition. If the input pdfs are independent (hence the cycle-free restriction) Gaussian distributed with mean µ and variance σ2, then the output pdf with have mean 2µ and variance 2σ2.
Density evolution is conventionally used as a tool to evaluate the decoding threshold of a code ensemble, in other words the minimum signal-to-noise ratio at which a code ensemble could provide error-free decoding given

169 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:29:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a specific decoding algorithm and message encoding. For each decoding iteration, density evolution provides the probability distribution of LLR message values that would be observed in the factor graph for an LDPC code with the specified degree distribution, assuming an infinite-length code with no cycles. Since density evolution can be used to predict message statistics over decoding iterations, it can be used to provide the appropriate probability values required to predict power consumption. In this paper we use the technique to evaluate power consumption profiles of code ensembles.

C. Density Evolution Model
We now explore the use of density evolution-based techniques in order to predict signal transition probabilities in stochastic decoders. In our study, the evolution of log-likelihood ratio (LLR) densities, usually performed with the assumption of unlimited LLR values and a floating point representation, is combined with the signal representation used in the stochastic implementation, in order to predict values of p0→1 at node outputs. Since density evolution can be used to predict the evolution of signal probabilities over iterations, the process of incorporating these into the power prediction is relatively straightforward. We obtain:

p0→1 = p0 × p1,

(4)

where p0 and p1 represent the probabilities of a signal being 0 and 1 respectively for consecutive time steps. With these we should be able to plot the energy usage statistics of a decoder over iterations. In a stochastic decoder with J-K flip-flop-based variable nodes, each iteration requires the transmission of one bit from variable nodes to check nodes, and one bit from check nodes back to variable nodes. Density evolution is used to calculate the probability that these bits are equal to 1 over the decoding iterations. The probability that a variablenode-to-check-node bit is equal to 1 at iteration i, is denoted as pv,i, and the probability that a check-nodeto-variable-node bit is equal to 1 at iteration i, is denoted as pc,i. In our study the all-zero codeword is assumed. Channel values are encoded as an input probability pin representing the probability that a channel value corresponds to a binary 1. The procedure is described by Algorithm 1. Since we do not consider joint probability mass functions over consecutive iterations, we assume Bernoulli outputs from variable nodes, as would be found in edge memory-based stochastic decoders.
The equation from Step 5 is obtained by considering the probability that the output of the variable node will be equal to 1, given (a) the probability pc,i−1 that the individual stochastic bits coming from the check nodes are 1, (b) the probability pin that the channel input

Algorithm 1 Density evolution for edge memory-based stochastic decoder over the BSC channel.
Initialization
Step 1: Calculate pin for given Eb/N0 Step 2: pv,0 ← 0.5 Step 3: pc,0 ← 0.5 Step 4: i ← 1
Iteration Step 5: pv,i ← (pc,i−1)dv−1pin + pv,i−1[1 − (pc,i−1)dv−1pin − (1 − pc,i−1)dv−1(1 − pin)] Step 6: pc,i ← CHKdc−1(pv,i) Step 7: i ← i + 1 Step 8: Repeat steps 5 through 7 until the decoder converges or for a fixed number of iterations

stochastic bit is 1, and (c) the probability pv,i−1 that the previous variable node output stochastic bit was a 1. Step 6 corresponds to the calculation of a variable node output to the interleaver, and hence uses dv−1 inputs from the check nodes. The equation is generated by considering all combinations of input values and previous variable node outputs that produce a 1 at the output for the next clock cycle. The first term in the equation considers the case where all stochastic bits from check nodes as well as the channel input stochastic bit are equal to 1, and the second term considers the remaining cases where the inputs disagree, but the previous variable node output stochastic bit was already a 1.
CHK in Step 6 can be expressed as a recursion:

CHKw(x) = (1−x)×CHKw−1(x)+x×(1−CHKw−1(x)),

(5)

where

CHK2(x) = 2x(1 − x),

(6)

and where w represents the number of inputs from variable nodes to consider (usually dc − 1), and x represents the probability that an input from a variable node is equal to 1. The equations calculate the wellknown soft-XOR function.

D. Simulation Study
Figure 2 plots the probabilities of observing 1’s in the stochastic streams at the outputs of the check nodes, variable nodes, and the decoder, versus iteration number. In Figure 2 (a), pin = 0.10, resulting in very quick convergence. In Figure 2 (b), pin = 0.24, which is slightly better than the threshold for the code. Here the decoder converges after approximately 55 iterations. In Figure 2 (c), pin = 0.27 is used. Here the decoder does not converge, even after 100 iterations.

170 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:29:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 2. Probability of stochastic bits vs iteration for a (3,6) LDPC code ensemble and (a) pin = 0.10, (b) pin = 0.24, and (c) pin = 0.27.

Fig. 3. Transition probability p0−>1 vs iteration for stochastic decoder with pin = 0.24 - check node output and variable node output.

Observation 1: Since the probability statistics vary with SNR, the power consumption also ought to be dependent on SNR. This is consistent with observations previously reported in the literature.
In Figure 3 we plot p0→1 versus iteration number for a stochastic decoder for a (3,6) code ensemble and with pin = 0.24. The values of p0→1 are calculated as:

pv,0→1,i = (1 − pv,i)pv,i+1,

(7)

pc,0→1,i = (1 − pc,i)pc,i+1,

(8)

Again, we observe that the transition probability decreases to zero once the decoder has converged after approximately 55 iterations.

Observation 2: The transition probability is not constant over iterations. In fact in a stochastic decoder the transition probability converges to zero over iterations. In other words, even though a stochastic signaling scheme is used, the decoder still converges to a codeword and stops consuming dynamic power.

Observation 3: Since the transition probability converges to zero, it is possible to calculate the total expected number of transitions per wire in the decoder.

We can now determine the expected number of 0to-1 transitions in a stochastic stream during decoding, by summing p0→1 over the iterations. Quantities are calculated as follows:

∞
Tv = pv,0→1,i,
i=0 ∞
Tc = pc,0→1,i.
i=0

(9) (10)

These quantities are dependent on the input probability and on the code ensemble. With these numbers, and expected values of CL and VDD, we can estimate energy consumption required for various code ensembles.

Observation 4: We expect to see more transitions as we approach the threshold for the code.

A simple model for a lower bound on energy consumption per decoded information bit is explained below. Let us first assume that each wire in a decoder has a constant capacitance CL. Let us also assume a constant supply voltage of VDD, used throughout the circuit. For each information bit there are dv/R = dc interleaver connections, where dv is the variable node degree, dc is the check node degree, and R is the code rate. Assuming only one decoder output needs to be driven for each information bit, and assuming no internal node capacitances need to be driven (not always an accurate assumption), we end up with the following expression:

Ebit = CLVD2D Tvdv

1 R

+ Tcdc

1−R R

, (11)

where Ebit is the energy consumed per decoded information bit independent of clock frequency.
For the (3,6) code ensemble and an input stochastic probability of 0.24, Ebit is:
Ebit = CLVD2D [6 (7.2 + 12.0)] = 115.2CLVD2D. (12)

On an example 1 V supply, with an average wire capacitance of 1 pF (the numbers are chosen for illustrative

171 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:29:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. Ttotal versus pin for a (3,6) LDPC code ensemble.

TABLE I
Ttotal FOR STOCHASTIC DECODERS FOR REGULAR CODE ENSEMBLES, WITH pin = 0.20.

Tv

Tc Ttotal

(2,4) 1.42 2.62 16.16

(3,6) 2.96 4.95 47.46

(4,8) 9.05 15.3 194.8

purposes), this results in an energy consumption of 115 pJ per decoded information bit. A density evolutionbased code design strategy should therefore aim to minimize the quantity

1

1−R

Ttotal = Tvdv R + Tcdc

R

, (13)

from Equation 11. Note that this model does not account for sources of static power consumption, glitching, or for the energy cost of the computational nodes. We plot Ttotal versus pin for the (3,6) ensemble in Fig. 4.
Applying the techniques above to compare three regular LDPC code ensembles, namely a (2,4) ensemble, a (3,6) ensemble, and a (4,8) ensemble, we obtain the following results. The threshold for the (2,4) and (4,8) codes is close to pin = 0.22, whereas it is close to 0.25 for the (3,6) ensemble. Hence for a fair comparison, we use pin = 0.20 in all cases. The values for Tv, Tc, and the resulting value of Ttotal for each ensemble, are given in Table I. We observe that not only does the (3,6) code ensemble have a better threshold than the (4,8) ensemble, it also requires approximately four times less energy to decode every information bit! Perhaps also surprising is that the (2,4) code, which has an inferior threshold to the (3,6) code, has a superior decoding energy performance, by a factor of three. Note that the relative energy performance of the code ensembles is better than would be expected by the reduction in total number of wires in the factor graph.

Observation 5: Decoding energy per bit is not only dependent on SNR, but also on the code ensemble.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
We have demonstrated that not only can density evo-
lution be used to provide a decoding threshold SNR for
ensembles of error control codes, but that it can also
be used to compare the expected energy consumption of
decoders for these ensembles. Such a tool can be used
in the code design stage. We also note that stochastic
decoders, despite requiring many clock cycles to perform
at reasonable BER values, do indeed converge and hence
stop consuming dynamic power. Finally, in this study the
code with the best threshold does not necessarily have
the best decoding energy. REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. Mackay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] N. Onizawa, A. Mochizuki, T. Hanyu, and V. Gaudet, “Multiplevalued duplex asynchronous data transfer scheme for interleaving in ldpc decoders,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Multiple Valued Logic, May 2005, pp. 138–143.
[4] S. Sharifi-Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Survey of stochastic computation on factor graphs,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Multiple Valued Logic, 2007.
[5] V. C. Gaudet and A. Rapley, “Iterative decoding using stochastic computation,” Electronics Letters, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 200–301, Feb. 6, 2003.
[6] C. Winstead, A. Rapley, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Stochastic iterative decoders,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, 2005, pp. 1116–1120.
[7] S. Sharifi-Tehrani, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 716–718, Oct. 2006.
[8] S. Sharifi-Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. Gross, “An area-efficient FPGA-based architecture for fully-parallel stochastic LDPC decoding,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Oct. 2007, pp. 255–260.
[9] S. Sharifi-Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Fully parallel stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5692–5703, Nov. 2008.
[10] J. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan, and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits - A Design Perspective, 2nd ed. Prentice Hall, 2003.
[11] V. C. Gaudet and W. J. Gross, “On density evolution and dynamic power estimation in stochastic iterative decoders,” in Analog Decoding Workshop, Torino, Italy, 2006, pp. 43–46.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[13] V. Gaudet, C. Schlegel, and R. Dodd, “LDPC decoder message formatting based on activity factor minimization using differential density evolution,” in IEEE Information Theory Workshop, June 2007, pp. 571–576.
[14] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[15] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “MultiGbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, 2005, pp. 5194–5197.
[16] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, March 2002.

172 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:29:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

