1048

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

A Low-Complexity Message-Passing Algorithm for Reduced Routing Congestion in LDPC Decoders
Tinoosh Mohsenin, Dean N. Truong, and Bevan M. Baas

Abstract—A low-complexity message-passing algorithm, called

Split-Row Threshold, is used to implement low-density parity-check

(LDPC) decoders with reduced layout routing congestion. Five

LDPC decoders that are compatible with the 10GBASE-T stan-

dard are implemented using MinSum Normalized and MinSum

Split-Row Threshold algorithms. All decoders are built using

= 16 a standard cell design flow and include all steps through the

generation of GDS II layout. An

decoder achieves

improvements in area, throughput, and energy efficiency of

4.1 times, 3.3 times, and 4.8 times, respectively, compared to a

= 16 MinSum Normalized implementation. Postlayout results show

that a fully parallel

decoder in 65-nm CMOS operates

at 195 MHz at 1.3 V with an average throughput of 92.8 Gbits/s

with early termination enabled. Low-power operation at 0.7 V

gives a worst case throughput of 6.5 Gbits/s—just above the

10GBASE-T requirement—and an estimated average power of 62

mW, resulting in 9.5 pJ/bit. At 0.7 V with early termination en-

abled, the throughput is 16.6 Gbits/s, and the energy is 3.7 pJ/bit,

which is 5.8 lower than the previously reported lowest energy per bit. The decoder area is 4.84 mm2 with a final postlayout area

utilization of 97%.

Index Terms—Full parallel, high throughput, low-density parity check (LDPC), low power, message passing, min sum, nanometer, 10GBASE-T, 65-nm CMOS, 802.3an.

I. INTRODUCTION
S TARTING in the 1990s, much work was done to enhance error-correction codes to where communication over noisy channels was possible near the Shannon limit. Defined by sparse random graphs and using probability-based message-passing algorithms, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] became popular for their error-correction and near-channel-capacity performances. At first, neglected since its discovery [2], advances in VLSI have given LDPC a recent revival [3]–[6]. LDPC has relatively low error floors, as well as better error performance with large code lengths, and as a result, they have been adopted as the forward error-correction method for many recent standards, such as digital video broadcasting via satellite (DVB-S2) [7], the WiMAX standard for microwave communications (802.16e) [8], the G.hn/G.9960 standard for wired home networking [9], and the 10GBASE-T standard for 10-Gbit Ethernet (802.3an) [10]. While there has been much

Manuscript received October 07, 2009; revised December 25, 2009; accepted January 30, 2010. First published May 10, 2010; current version published May 21, 2010 . This work was supported in part by ST Microelectronics, by Intel Corporation, by UC Micro, by the National Science Foundation under CCF Grants 0430090 and 0903549 and CAREER Award 0546907, by Semiconductor Research Corporation under GRC Grants 1598 and 1971 and CSR Grant 1659, by Intellasys Corporation, by SEM, and by a University of California at Davis (UCD) Faculty Research grant. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Y. Massoud.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: tmohsenin@ucdavis. edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2010.2046957

research on LDPC decoders and their VLSI implementations,

high-speed systems that require many processing nodes typi-

cally suffer from large wire-dominated circuits operating at low

clock rates due to large critical path delays caused by the codes’

inherently irregular and global communication patterns. These

delay and energy costs caused by wires are likely to increase in

future fabrication technologies [11].

With these concerns in mind, the design of a future LDPC

decoder will require high performance and low power with the

following: 1) a large number of nodes that have a high degree of

interconnectedness and/or 2) a large memory capacity with high

memory bandwidths. These requirements are due, in part, to the

message-passing algorithm used by the LDPC decoder. Tradi-

tionally, this was done with the sum–product algorithm (SPA)

[12] or the MinSum algorithm [13]. Our previous work intro-

duced two nonstandard LDPC decoding algorithms based on

min sum, called “Split-Row” [14] and “multisplit” [15] algo-

rithms, that were proven to increase throughput up to five times,

and reduce wiring and area three times [16]. Split-row algorithm

achieves this through the partitioning of MinSum algorithm’s

global

operation into semiautonomous localized

operations. As a result of the reduction in message passing, there

is a 0.3- to 0.7-dB reduction in performance, depending on the

level of partitioning.

The recently published “Split-Row Threshold” algorithms

add a comparison to a threshold constant that is used to par-

tially recover the lost

information [17], [18]. A set of

1-bit global signals is needed with very few additional logic

blocks; significant error performance recovery is achieved

with only 0.07-dB loss from MinSum Normalized algorithm

[18]. Greater levels of partitioning is now accessible at less

error performance loss and will enable designs of fully par-

allel decoder architectures that have increased throughput

and energy efficiency, and reduced area and power [19]. This

paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews iterative

message-passing algorithms for LDPC decoders and common

decoder architectures, Section III studies the Split-Row algo-

rithm and its ability to reduce routing congestion in layout,

Section IV introduces a low-hardware-cost modification to

Split-Row algorithm called Split-Row Threshold algorithm that

improves error performance while maintaining the former’s

routing reduction benefits, Section V shows the detailed fully

parallel Split-Row Threshold architecture, Section VI analyzes

the postlayout results of fully parallel 10GBASE-T LDPC

decoders that implement Split-Row Threshold, and Section VII

concludes this paper.

II. BACKGROUND

A. MinSum Decoding Algorithm
The iterative message-passing algorithm is the most widely used method for practical decoding [1], [20], and its basic flow is shown in Fig. 1. After receiving the corrupted information

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOHSENIN et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM FOR REDUCED ROUTING CONGESTION IN LDPC DECODERS

1049

of an elementary equation by a

function. The MinSum

check node update equation is given as

sign

(2)

Fig. 1. Flow diagram of an iterative message-passing decoding algorithm.

where each message is generated using the messages from

all variable nodes connected to check node , as defined

by (excluding ). Note that a normalizing scaling factor

is included to improve error performance, and thus, this

variant of MinSum algorithm is called “MinSum Normalized

algorithm” [21], [22]. Because check node processing requires

the exclusion of while calculating the

for , it ne-

cessitates finding both the first and second minimums (

and

, respectively). In this case,

is more precisely

defined as follows:

from an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel ,

the algorithm begins by processing it and then iteratively cor-

rects the received data. First, all check node inputs are initial-

ized to “0,” and then, a check node update step (i.e., row pro-

cessing) is done to produce messages. Second, the variable

node receives the new messages, and then, the variable node

update step (i.e., column processing) is done to produce mes-

sages. This process repeats for another iteration by passing the

previous iteration’s messages to the check nodes. The algo-

rithm finally terminates when it reaches a maximum number of

decoding iterations

or a valid code word is detected,

which is explained in Section II-D.

An LDPC code is defined by an

parity-check ma-

trix , which encapsulates important matrix parameters: The

number of rows is the number of check nodes, the number of

columns (or code length) is the number of variable nodes, and

row weight and column weight define the 1’s per row

and column, respectively. For clearer explanations, in this paper,

we examine cases where is regular and, thus, and are

constants. As an example, the 10GBASE-T code

matrix has a

and

. There are

check

nodes and

variable nodes, and wherever

,

there is an edge (interconnection) between check node and

variable node . In other words, the LDPC matrix is a matrix

describing a graph, whose vertices are check and variable nodes

and whose edges are the interconnections between the nodes of

the LDPC code.

In practice, among the iterative message-passing algorithms,

Sum Product algorithm (SPA) [12] and MinSum algorithm [13]

have become the standard decoding methods. Both algorithms

are defined by a check node update equation that generates

and a variable node update equation that generates . The

MinSum variable node update equation, which is identical to

the SPA version, is given as

where

if if
(3)
(4) (5)

Moreover, the term sign is actually an XOR of sign bits,

which generate the final sign bit that is concatenated to the mag-

nitude , whose value is equal to the

function given

in (3).

The MinSum equations themselves do not cause the difficul-

ties of implementing LDPC decoders since, from an outward ap-

pearance, the core kernel is simply an addition for the variable

node update, and an XOR plus comparator tree for the check node

update. Rather, the complexities are caused by the large number

of nodes and interconnections, as defined by in tandem with

the message-passing algorithm. Recall that the 10GBASE-T

matrix has 2048 variable nodes , with each one connected

to six check nodes

and 384 check nodes , with each

connected to 32 variable nodes . As a result, we have

connections,

where check nodes send, as an aggregate, 12 288 messages to

the variable nodes and the variable nodes, as an aggregate, send

12 288 messages to the check nodes per iteration.

In summary, for a single iteration of the message-passing al-

gorithm, the 10GBASE-T LDPC code requires a total of

total check node update computations and

total variable node update computations, as well

as pass these updated results for a total of

unique messages.

B. Fully Parallel Decoders

Fully parallel decoders directly map each row and each (1) column of the parity-check matrix to a different processing
unit, while all these processing units operate in parallel [4],

where each message is generated using the noisy channel

information (of a single bit), , and the messages from all

check nodes

connected to variable node , as defined

by (excluding ). MinSum algorithm simplifies the SPA

check node update equation, which replaces the computation

[5], [15], [19]. All check nodes, variable nodes, and

their associated

total connections are

implemented. Thus, a fully parallel decoder will have

check and variable node processors, and

global interconnections. A fully parallel 10GBASE-T LDPC

decoder will require 2432 processors which are interconnected

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

= 1 = 1 Fig. 2. Physical indicators of interconnection complexity over five Spn decoders (Spn , 2, 4, 8, and 16) normalized to the the case where Spn (i.e.,

( = 1 p ) min sum). A 5-bit data path (1-bit sign and 4-bit magnitude) is used for all five decoder implementations. (a) Normalized ratios of per-partition properties: average

wire length, capacitance, area, and worst case delay, compared with the routing congestion model g

= Spn . (b) Normalized ratios of whole decoder

properties: total wire length, percentage gate count and area increase (i.e., A versus A ), and via/pin/net/gate count, compared with routing CPU time.

by a set of

global wires and their associated wire

buffers (i.e., repeaters), where is the number of bits in the

data path. Thus, optimizing the fixed-point format becomes an

important design parameter in reducing chip costs, not only by

optimizing logic area but also interconnect complexity.

In general, while fully parallel decoders have larger area

and capacitance, and lower operating frequencies than their

partially parallel counterparts (to be discussed shortly in the

next section), they typically only need a single cycle per

message-passing iteration; thus, fully parallel decoders are

inherently more energy efficient [5].

D. Early Termination

For a basic message-passing algorithm, simulation can be

used to determine a predefined set of iterations for a range of

expected SNRs. However, a more efficient method is to deter-

mine whether the variable nodes have reached a valid solution to

the syndrome check equation:

[1], [20], where

represents the beta messages of each variable node , i.e., the

recovered bits of . When satisfied, early termination occurs,

and the message is considered error free since parity among the

row. s of has been met

C. Fully Serial and Partially Parallel Decoders

In contrast to fully parallel decoders, fully serial decoders

have one processing core and one memory block. If the pro-

cessing core can calculate either a single check or variable node

update per cycle, then the memory must store all

messages. With this architecture, a 10GBASE-T fully serial

LDPC decoder will require a

-bit memory. A 5-bit data

path would require the memory to store 122 880 bits or 15.36

kB. To increase performance, we can alternatively make the pro-

cessing core larger and calculate several checks and variables

per cycle and thus reduce the memory requirement. However,

this requires a multiport SRAM, which increases SRAM area

significantly [23], and building large high-performance SRAMs

in deep-submicrometer technologies results in sizable leakage

currents [24].

Although much smaller than fully parallel decoders, fully se-

rial decoders have much lower throughputs and larger latencies.

Partially parallel designs [6], [25]–[28] ideally try to find a bal-

ance between the two extremes by partitioning into rowwise

and columnwise groupings such that a set of check node and

variable node updates can be done per cycle.

Block-structured [29] or quasi-cyclic [30] codes are very

well suited for partially parallel decoder implementations.

The parity-check matrix of these codes consists of square

submatrices, where each submatrix is either a zero matrix or a

permuted identity. This structure makes the memory address

generation for partially parallel decoders very efficient, and

many communication standards, such as DVB-S2, 802.11n,

and 802.16e, use this structure.

III. ROUTING CONGESTION REDUCTION WITH SPLIT-ROW ALGORITHM

A. Split-Row Decoding Algorithm

The Split-Row decoding algorithm uses columnwise parti-

tioning of the matrix to reduce the interconnect complexity

due to message passing in the check node update step

[14]–[16]. Block-structured and quasi-cyclic codes which

have regular row weight (an equal number of ones per row)

receive the greatest benefit from the Split-Row architecture

because the routing congestion reduction of partitions is

equal and, therefore, the total congestion is minimized. Then,

if

, the 10GBASE-T matrix, which has a row

weight of 32, is “split” into two submatrices, each with a

dimension of

. For simplicity

of presentation, we assume even partitioning such that

is divided equally into

partitions, where

is

an integer, although there is no reason why the algorithm

cannot be applied to decoders with matrices of other forms.

This results in two decoder partitions that each has reduced

total check node update compu-

tations because of their reduced row weight

and

reduced

total variable node update

computations because of their reduced number of variable

nodes

. The number of messages passed within each

partition is now

,

which is half that of a complete min sum.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOHSENIN et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM FOR REDUCED ROUTING CONGESTION IN LDPC DECODERS

1051

Fig. 3. Channel data (), H matrix, the initialization matrix, and the check node output () values after the first iteration using MinSum Normalized, MinSum
Split-Row, and MinSum Split-Row Threshold algorithms. The Split-Row algorithm entries in (e) with the largest deviation from MinSum Normalized algorithm are circled and are largely corrected with the Split-Row Threshold method in (f). Correction factors are set to be one here.

Simply put, Split-Row algorithm modifies the check node up- The major cost of partitioning comes from the incomplete

date (2) of MinSum Normalized algorithm and results in the message passing that specifically affects check node updates (to

following:

be discussed in Section IV-A).

B. Routing Congestion Reduction

In theory, for equally dimensioned matrices, we have

(6)

where

represents the

variable nodes only contained

in decoder partition on row (recall that each partition

has

variable nodes). Notice that the sign information

is complete and is the only global signal propagating between

the “split” decoder partitions.

Because Split-Row algorithm is a general modification of the

message-passing algorithm, it can be used with both SPA and

MinSum algorithm [16]. In addition, Split-Row algorithm, like

SPA or MinSum algorithm, is not restricted to either fully par-

allel, fully serial, or partially parallel architectures. However, the

major benefit from “splitting” is its ability to reduce routing con-

gestion, which primarily only affects the global interconnects

caused by message passing. Fully serial architectures will gain

nothing, while fully parallel architectures will improve greatly;

partially parallel architectures will find their level of improve-

ment based on the amount of “parallelism” versus “serialism”

contained in their designs.

times the number of computations and

times

the number of messages for each decoder partition per itera-

tion. However, since we still have times the number of

decoder partitions, then it initially appears that the intercon-

nect, memory, and logic complexity should in fact be the same.

However, it has been shown that, for fully parallel decoders,

Split-Row algorithm provides significant increase in area uti-

lization over other message-passing decoders that implement

large row weight LDPC codes [5], [14], [15], [23]. This result

is reasonable if we consider the physical role that interconnect

complexity plays in the design of VLSI systems.

Given an LDPC decoder with equal decoder partitions,

each with

logic and memory resources, the core area

per partition is proportional to . quantifies the silicon

area used exclusively for logic and memory (e.g., standard cells,

SRAMs, etc.). Routing congestion is defined as

,

where is the number of “tracks demanded” and is the

number of “tracks supplied” [31]. Tracks are the lengthwise

(or widthwise) wires drawn assuming constant metal pitch and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

width. The maximum number of tracks for one metal layer is

proportional to the length (or width) of . Therefore, if we as-

sume that the layout is square,1

, which provides a

measure of the maximum routing resources available. Given that

(i.e., the communication requirements) per partition, then, as the decoder partition’s

is reduced by

, the routing congestion for an LDPC

decoder with partitions is

. In other words, is the ratio of interconnect com-

plexity over a given chip dimension.

Fig. 2(a) shows the with the per-partition capacitance, area, average wire length, and worst case (intrapartition) delay

of five postlayout 10GBASE-T LDPC decoder implementations

with

, 2, 4, 8, and 16. (Note that

repre-

sents a decoder using MinSum Normalized algorithm.) Clearly,

our routing congestion model

follows these

metrics closely. For all five decoders, we use a 5-bit data path (1-bit sign and 4-bit magnitude). Since Split-Row algorithm

eliminates the wires for check node magnitudes between par-

titions, its impact of routing congestion reduction is even more significant when implementing larger data-path widths. On the

other hand, using a smaller data-path width results in signifi-

cant error performance loss when compared to a floating-point implementation. Usually, a 4–6-bit data path results in near-

floating-point error performance.

Cadence’s SoC Encounter computer-aided design (CAD) tool’s computational complexity, given by its routing CPU

time, is a real measure of routing congestion on their algo-

rithms’ ability to converge to a solution that satisfies the design rules, timing, etc. Since the total wire length can be used as a

pessimistic measure of routing congestion [31], then it should

behave closely with the route CPU time. Fig. 2(b) shows this, and in fact, the percentage area (as well as gate count) increase,

as compared to the original core (synthesis/core area and gate

count), also follow this trend. Via count also matches with the rate of change in the total wire length, albeit at a different

magnitude. Notice that gate, pin, and net counts do not increase

rapidly until

, which indicates that increases in wire

buffering change more dramatically, starting at the

data point. Since the gate, pin, and net counts represent the

connectivity needed by the design and are not decreasing as

much as compared to the total wire length for

, this

means that the amount of tracks needed

is decreasing

Fig. 4. Impact of choosing threshold value (T ) on the error performance and BER comparisons for a (6, 32) (2048, 1723) LDPC code using SPA and MinSum Normalized, MinSum Split-Row (original), and MinSum Split-Row Threshold algorithms with different levels of partitioning and with optimal threshold and correction factor values. (a) BER performance versus threshold value (T ) with different SNR values for Split-2 Threshold. The optimal region is circled with an average value of T = 0:2. (b) Error performance results.

faster than the silicon complexity. Therefore, both postlayout

and core areas will converge with increasing :

.

In conclusion, theoretical results have shown that Split-Row

algorithm can reduce routing congestion by a factor of

.

Actual implementation results of decoders at the postlayout step

bore out this conclusion.

the check-node-generated values in the partition with the error

are overestimated. This leads to a possible incorrect estimation

of the bits during its variable node update.

Fig. 3 shows (a) the channel data and (b) the first three

rows of the parity-check matrix for an LDPC code with

and

. Fig. 3(c) shows the initialization step where

all nonzero entries are initialized with channel data. Moreover,

IV. SPLIT-ROW THRESHOLD DECODING METHOD

Fig. 3 shows the check node outputs using (d) MinSum, (e) MinSum Split-Row, and (f) MinSum Split-Row Threshold algo-

A. Split-Row Error Performance
The major drawback of Split-Row algorithm is that it suffers from a 0.4–0.7 dB error performance loss that is proportional to
compared to MinSum algorithm and SPA [12] decoders. Because each Split-Row partition has no information about the minimum value of the other partition, the minimum value in one partition could be much larger than the global minimum. Then,

1If the layout is rectangular, then we have two routing congestion numbers

g

and g

, and the same analysis is done for each. For simplicity, we

assume a square layout.

rithms based on the initialization step. To find

and

for each case, reader should look at Fig. 3(c). For example, in

Fig. 3(c), in the first row, the entries are 0.2, 0.1, 2, 3, 0.3, and

5. Therefore,

and

in Fig. 3(d).

In Split-Row algorithm, entries with the largest deviations

from MinSum Normalized algorithm are circled. For example,

in the second row of the Split-Row matrix output in (e), the local

minimum

in Sp1 is “2,” which is ten times larger than

the local minimum in Sp0, i.e., “0.2”, which is also the global

minimum of the entire row. This results in an overestimation of

values for the bits on the right side of the second row, possibly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOHSENIN et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM FOR REDUCED ROUTING CONGESTION IN LDPC DECODERS

1053

causing an incorrect decision for these three bits. In the first row,

although

in Sp1, which is “0.3,” is close to the

in

Sp0 (“0.1”), the

in Sp1 (“3”) deviates significantly from

the

in Sp0 (“0.2”), and this results in a large error in the

bit on the right side.

17: else 18 19: do (7) 20: end if

B. Split-Row Threshold Algorithm

The Split-Row Threshold algorithm significantly improves

the error performance without reducing the effectiveness of

Split-Row algorithm while adding negligible hardware to the

check node processor and one additional wire between blocks

[18]. Like Split-Row algorithm, the check node processing

step is partitioned into multiple semiautonomous

par-

titions. Each partition computes the local

and

simultaneously and sends the sign bit with a single wire to

the neighboring blocks serially. However, in the Split-Row

Threshold algorithm, both

and

are additionally

compared with a predefined threshold , and a single-bit

threshold-enable

global signal is sent to

indicate the presence of a potential global minimum to other

partitions.

Algorithm 1 Split-Row Threshold Algorithm

Require:

Require:

and

as given in (4) and (5)

Require: threshold value

1: // Finds

and

2: // for the th partition of a -decoder .

3:

4: if

and

then

5:

6:

if if

(7)

The kernel of the Split-Row Threshold algorithm is given in

Algorithm 1. As shown, four conditions will occur: Condition

1 occurs when both

and

are less than threshold

; thus, they are used to calculate messages according to

(7). In addition,

, which repre-

sents the general threshold-enable signal of a partition with

two neighbors, asserted high, indicating that the least minimum

( ) in this partition is smaller than . Condition 2, as rep-

resented by lines 7 to 13, occurs when only

is less than .

As with Condition 1,

. If at

least one

signal from the nearest neigh-

boring partitions is high, indicating that the local minimum in

the other partition is less than , then we use

and to

update the messages, while using (8) (Condition 2a). Other-

wise, we use (7) (Condition 2b). Condition 3, as represented

by lines 14 to 16, occurs when the local

is larger than

and at least one

signal from the nearest

neighboring partitions is high; thus, we only use to compute

all messages for the partition using (9). Condition 4, as rep-

resented by lines 17 to 19 occurs when the local

is larger

than and if the

signals are all low;

thus, we again use (7). The variable node operation in Split-Row

Threshold algorithm is identical to the MinSum Normalized and

Split-Row algorithms.

The updated check node messages after one iteration

using the Split-Row Threshold algorithm

are shown

in Fig. 3(f). Conditions 1 and 4 lead to the original Split-Row de-

coding, while Conditions 2 and 3 largely correct the errors by the

original Split-Row algorithm. Note that this is a simplistic rep-

resentation of the improvement that the threshold decoding will

have over Split-Row decoding method for larger parity-check

matrices.

C. BER Simulation Results

7: else if 8: 9 if
10:
11: else 12: do (7) 13: end if 14: else if
or 15: 16:

and

then

or then

if if

and then

The error performance depends strongly on the choice of

threshold values. If the threshold is chosen to be very large,

most local

and

values will be smaller than which

results in only Condition 1 being met and the algorithm be-

haves like the original MinSum Split-Row. On the other hand

if the threshold value is very small, most local minimums will

be larger than and only Condition 4 is met which is again the

original MinSum Split-Row algorithm.

The optimum value for is obtained by empirical simula-

(8) tions. Although the Threshold algorithm itself is independent of

the modulation scheme and channel model, in this work we use

BPSK modulation and an AWGN channel for all simulations.

Simulations were run until 80 error blocks were recorded.

Blocks were processed until the decoder converged early or the

maximum of 11 decoding iterations was reached. To further il-

lustrate the impact of the threshold value on error performance,

Fig. 4(a) plots the error performance of a (6,32) (2048,1723)

RS-based LDPC code [32], adopted for 10GBASE-T [10]

versus threshold values for different SNRs, using Split-Row

Threshold with

. As shown in the figure, there are

two limits for the threshold value which lead the algorithm to

converge to the error performance of the original Split-Row.

(9) Also, shown is the optimum value for the threshold

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 5. Block diagram of magnitude and sign update in the check node processor of partition Sp(i) in Split-Row Threshold decoder. The Threshold Logic is
shown within the dashed line. The 4:2 comparator block is shown at the right.
TABLE I
T AVERAGE OPTIMAL THRESHOLD VALUE ( ) FOR THE SPLIT-ROW THRESHOLD
DECODER WITH DIFFERENT LEVELS OF PARTITIONING, FOR A (6, 32) (2048, 1723) LDPC CODE

for which the algorithm performs best. Bit error rate (BER)

simulation results for (16, 16) (175, 255) EG-LDPC and (4, 16)

(1536, 1155) QC-LDPC codes show that the average optimal

thresholds with two partitions are 0.22 and 0.23, respectively.

The threshold value can be dynamically varied or made

static. Example implementations include dynamically

changed while processing, statically configured at runtime,

or hard wired directly into the hardware. In general, the less

is allowed to vary, decoders will have higher throughput,

and higher energy efficiency. Fortunately, as can be seen in

Fig. 4(a), the optimal BER performance is near the same Fig. 6. Block diagram of variable node update architecture for MinSum Northreshold value for a wide range of SNR values, which means malized and MinSum Split-Row Threshold decoders.

that dynamically varying produces little benefit. Efficient

implementations can use a static optimal value for found through BER simulations.
One benefit of Split-Row Threshold decoding is that partitioning of the check node processing can be arbitrary as long as there are two variable nodes per partition and the error performance loss is less than 0.3 dB. For example, Fig. 4(b) shows the error performance results for a (6, 32) (2048, 1723) LDPC code for (from left to right) SPA, MinSum Normalized algorithm,

to Split-2 Threshold is 0.15 dB at

. Moreover,

shown in the plot is the Split-2 original algorithm, which is

still 0.12 dB away from the Split-16 Threshold algorithm.

Table I summarizes the average optimal threshold values

for Split-Row Threshold decoder and shows small changes

with different partitioning levels.

V. SPLIT-ROW THRESHOLD DECODING ARCHITECTURE

MinSum Split-Row Threshold algorithm with different levels

of splitting

and with optimal threshold values, and, A. Check Node Processor

lastly, Split-Row algorithm (original). As the figure shows, the The logical implementation of a check node processor in

MinSum Split-2 Thresholds are about 0.13 and 0.07 dB away partition using Split-Row Threshold decoding is shown in from SPA and MinSum Normalized algorithm, respectively. Fig. 5. The magnitude update of is shown along the upper

The SNR loss between multiple Split-Row Threshold decoders part of the figure, while the global sign is determined with

is less than 0.05 dB, and the total loss from Split-16 Threshold the XOR logic along the lower part. In Split-Row Threshold

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOHSENIN et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM FOR REDUCED ROUTING CONGESTION IN LDPC DECODERS

1055

M N Spn 2 Fig. 7. Top-level block diagram of a fully parallel decoder corresponding to an

Sign Threshold en J N=Spn N = partitions. The interpartition

and

signals are highlighted.

parity-check matrix, using Split-Row Threshold decoding with , where is the code length.

Sign T hreshold en Fig. 8. (a) Pipeline and (b) timing diagram for one partition of Split-Row Threshold decoder. In each partition, the check and variable node messages are updated

in one cycle after receiving the

and

signals from the nearest neighboring partitions.

decoding, the sign bit calculated from partition is passed

to the

and

neighboring partitions to

correctly calculate the global sign bit according to the check

node processing (2) and (6).

In both MinSum Normalized and Split-Row Threshold

decoding, the first minimum

and the second minimum

are found alongside the signal

, which

indicates whether

or

is chosen for a particular

. We use multiple stages of comparators to find

and

. The first stage (the leftmost) is composed of simple

comparators which sort the two inputs and generate min and

max outputs. The second stage and afterwards consist of mul-

tiple 4 to 2 (4:2) comparators, and the details are shown in a

block in the right corner of Fig. 5. One benefit of the Split-Row

Threshold algorithm is that the number of inputs (variable

node outputs) to each check node is reduced by a factor of

, which lowers the circuit complexity of each check

node processor as the number of comparator stages is reduced

to

.

The threshold logic implementation is shown within the

dashed line, which consists of two comparators and a few

logic gates. The Threshold Logic contains two additional

comparisons between

and

, and

and

, which are used to generate the final values. The

local

signal that is generated by comparing

and

is OR’ed with one of the incoming

signals from

and

neigh-

boring partitions and is then sent to their opposite neighbors.

B. Variable Node Processor

messages according to (1) and contains multistage adders. Its complexity highly depends on the numbers of inputs (column weight ) and the input word widths. As shown in the figure, this implementation uses a 5-bit data path.

C. Fully Parallel Decoder Implementation

The block diagram of a fully parallel implementation of

Split-Row Threshold decoding with

partitions, high-

lighting the and

passing signals, is shown

in Fig. 7. These are the only wires passing between the par-

titions. In each partition, local minimums are generated and

compared with simultaneously. If the local minimum is

smaller than , then the

signal is asserted high.

The magnitude of the check node outputs is computed using

local minimums and the

signal from neigh-

boring partitions. If the local partition’s minimums are larger

than and at least one of the

signals is high,

then is used to update its check node outputs. Otherwise, local

minimums are used to update check node outputs. Fig. 8(a)

shows the pipeline diagram of one partition in the decoder. The

timing diagram of a check node and a variable node update is

shown in Fig. 8(b). The check and variable node messages are

updated one after the other in one cycle after receiving the

and

signals from its neighboring partitions. In

fully parallel implementations, all check and variable processor

outputs are updated in parallel, and as shown in the timing

diagram in Fig. 8(b), it takes one cycle to update all messages

for one iteration. Therefore, the throughput for the proposed

fully parallel decoder with code length is

The variable node equations remain unchanged between MinSum Normalized and Split-Row Threshold algorithms, and thus, the variable node processors are identical in all cases. Fig. 6 shows the variable node processor architecture for both MinSum and Split-Row Threshold decoders, which computes

(10)
where is the maximum speed of the decoder and is based on the delay of one iterative check node and variable node processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 9. Layout of MinSum Normalized and MinSum Split-Row Threshold decoder implementations shown approximately to scale for the same code and design flow.

Fig. 10. Check to variable processor critical path Path1 and the interpartition T hreshold en critical path Path2 for the Split-Row Threshold decoding method with Spn partitions.

VI. DESIGN OF FIVE CMOS DECODERS

To further investigate the impact on the hardware im-

plementation due to partitioning, we have implemented

five fully parallel decoders using MinSum Normalized and

Split-Row Threshold methods with multiple partitionings for

the (6, 32) (2048, 1723) 10GBASE-T LDPC code in 65-nm

seven-metal-layer CMOS. All circuit-related performance

results are measured under “typical” process and temperature

conditions.

The parity-check matrix of the 10GBASE-T code has 384

rows, 2048 columns, a row weight of 32

, a column

weight of six

, and an information length of 1723. The

fully parallel MinSum Normalized decoder has 384 check and

2048 variable processors, corresponding to the parity-check ma-

trix dimensions and , respectively. The split architectures

reduce the number of interconnects by reducing the number

of columns per subblock by a factor of

. For example,

in each Split-16 subblock, there are 384 check processors (al-

though simplified) but only 128 (2048/16) variable processors.

The area and speed advantage of a Split-Row Threshold decoder

is significantly higher than in a MinSum Normalized implemen-

tation due to the benefits of smaller and relatively lower com-

plexity partitions, each of which communicates with short and

structured sign and

passing wires. In this imple-

mentation, we use a 5-bit fixed-point data path, which results in

about 0.1-dB error performance loss for MinSum Normalized

and MinSum Split-Row Threshold decoders, when compared

to the floating-point implementation. Increasing the fixed-point

word width improves the error performance at the cost of a

larger number of global wires and larger circuit area.

A. Design Flow and Implementation
We use a standard-cell-based automatic place and route flow to implement all decoders. The decoders were developed using Verilog to describe the architecture and hardware, synthesized with Synopsys Design Compiler, and placed and routed using

Cadence SOC Encounter. Each block is independently implemented and connected to the neighboring blocks with and
wires. We pass these signals across each block serially.
One of the key benefits of the Split-Row Threshold decoder is that it reduces the time and effort for a fully parallel decoder implementation of large LDPC codes using automatic CAD tools. Since Split-Row Threshold decoder reduces the check node processor complexity and the interconnection between check and variable nodes per block, then each block becomes more compact, whose internal wires are all relatively short. The blocks are interconnected by a small number of sign wires. This results in denser, faster, and more energy efficient circuits. Split-row also has the potential to minimize cross talk and IR drops due to reduced wire lengths, reduced routing congestion, more compact standard cell placement, and lower overall area.
Fig. 9 shows the postroute GDS II layout implementations drawn roughly to scale for the five decoders using MinSum Normalized and MinSum Split-Row Threshold algorithms with multiple levels of partitioning. In addition to the significant differences in circuit area for complete decoders, the even more dramatic difference in individual “place and route blocks” is also apparent.

B. Delay Analysis

In MinSum Normalized decoder, the critical path is the path

along a partition’s local logic and wire consisting of the longest

path through the check and variable node processors. However,

in Split-Row Threshold decoder, since the Threshold Logic (see

Fig. 5) is also dependent on the neighboring

sig-

nals from partitions

and

, one possible crit-

ical path is a

signal that finally propagates to

partition and changes the mux select bits influencing check

node output . To illustrate both critical paths, Fig. 10 shows

two possible worst case paths for Split-Row Threshold decoders

in bold. Path1 shows the original delay path through the check

and variable processors, while Path2 shows the propagation of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOHSENIN et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM FOR REDUCED ROUTING CONGESTION IN LDPC DECODERS

1057

fact that it is one OR gate delay. For Split-2, there is no middle

block, and therefore,

delay is not available. The total

interpartition

delay

for an -way

Split-Row Threshold decoder is the summation of all three delay

categories

(11)

Fig. 11. Components in the reg2out delay path for T hreshold en propagation signal in MinSum Split-Row Threshold decoding.

Just as with check to variable delays,

delays also

are subject to the effects of interconnect delays. Delays in the

and

paths both decrease with increased split-

tings due to the lessening wiring complexity. Note that, because

of the decrease in comparator stages with each increase in split-

ting in the check node processor, the

delay sees a sig-

nificant reduction while the worst case serial

signal path’s

increases its contribution by

, as

shown in (11).

The maximum speed of an -way threshold decoder

is determined by the maximum between

delay

and the check to variable pro-

cessor delay

paths

(12)

Although the

bit is also passed serially since its final

Fig. 12. Components in the in2reg delay path for T hreshold en propagation signal in MinSum Split-Row Threshold decoding.
TABLE II T hreshold en DELAY PATH COMPONENTS FOR THE SPLIT-ROW THRESHOLD DECODERS

value is updated with a single XOR logic in each block, its delay

is smaller than the

propagation delay and there-

fore is not considered.

The bar plots in Fig. 13 show the postroute delay break-

down of (a) Path1 (check to variable processor) and (b)

Path2 (

propagation) in the decoders and are

partitioned into interconnect and logic (check and variable

processors and registers). The timing results are obtained using

extracted delay/parasitic annotation files. As shown in the fig-

ures, for MinSum Normalized and Split-2 Threshold methods,

Path1 is the dominant critical path, but for

, Path2

(

propagation path) begins to dominate due to

the overwhelming contribution of the

term in (11).

The figures show that, while the variable processor delay

the

signal, starting from the leftmost partition’s

( ) check node processor, through

middle blocks,

and finally to the variable node processor of the rightmost parti-

tion (

). In general,

propagation path con-

sists of three delay blocks.

1) Origin Block (reg2out delay): This is the path where

signal is generated in a block and is shown

in Fig. 11. As shown in the figure, the path consists of

comparators to generate

and

, in addition

to a comparison with

, and an OR gate to

generate the

signal going to the next

partition.

2) Middle Blocks (in2out delay): This path consists of middle

blocks where

signal is passing through. As-

suming that local

and

in all blocks are gener-

remains constant (because all decoders use the same variable node architecture), the check node processor delay improves with the increase of splitting. For MinSum Normalized and MinSum Split-2 Threshold methods, the interconnect delay is largely dominant. This is caused by the long global wires between large numbers of processors. The interconnect path in these decoders is composed primarily of a long series of buffers and wire segments. Some buffers have long delays due to large fanouts of their outputs. For the MinSum Normalized and Split-2 decoders, the summation values of interconnect delays caused by buffers and wires (intrinsic gate delay and delay) in Path1 are 12.4 and 5.1 ns, which are 73% and 50% of their total delays, respectively.
C. Area Analysis

ated simultaneously, the delay in a middle block is one OR Fig. 14 shows the decoder area after (a) synthesis and (b)

gate which generates the

signal.

layout. The area of decoder after synthesis remains almost the

3) Destination Block (in2reg delay): This is the path that a same. However, for the MinSum Normalized and Split-2 de-

block updates the final check node output and is using coders, the layout area deviates significantly from the synthe-

the

signal from neighboring partitions. The sized area. The reason is because of the inherent interdepen-

path is shown in Fig. 12, which goes through the variable dence between many numbers of check and variable nodes for

processor and ends at the register.

large row weight LDPC codes; the number of timing critical

Table II summarizes the

,

, and

delay wires that the automatic place and route tool must constrain

values for four Split-Row Threshold decoders. As shown in the becomes an exponentially challenging problem. Typically, the

table, the

delay remains almost unchanged due to the layout algorithm will try to spread standard cells apart to route

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1058

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

Fig. 13. Postroute delay breakdown of major components in the critical paths of five decoders using MinSum Normalized and MinSum Split-Row Threshold
methods. (a) Path1: Check to variable processor delay. (b) Path2: T hreshold en propagation delay.

Fig. 14. Area breakdown for five decoders using MinSum Normalized and MinSum Split-Row Threshold methods. The interconnect and wire buffers are added after layout, which take a large portion of MinSum Normalized and MinSum Split-2 Threshold decoders. (a) Postsynthesis. (b) Postlayout.

the gates. This results in a lower logic (i.e., silicon/transistor) utilization and a larger overall area. As an additional illustration, Fig. 14 shows the area breakdown of the basic contributors of synthesis and layout for the decoders. As shown in the postlayout figure, more than 62% and 49% of the MinSum Normalized and Split-2 decoder areas are without standard cells and are required for wiring.
Moreover, another indication of circuit area is the wire length in the decoder chips, where there exist a limited number of metal layers (seven metal layers). In MinSum Normalized and Split-2 decoders, the average wire lengths are 93 and 71 m, which are 4.4 and 3.4 times longer than Split-16.

D. Power and Energy Analysis

The energy consumed by a decoder is directly proportional

to capacitance, and by setting all decoder designs to the same

voltage, then their given capacitances will indicate energy effi-

ciency. Because our routing congestion model [Fig. 2(a)] can

follow capacitance versus the number of partitions, then, for

a given , the normalized capacitance is

. For

, energy efficiency will be limited to

the algorithm and architecture—not the routing congestion in

layout.

The average power for Split-16 Threshold decoder is 0.70

times that of MinSum decoder. Interestingly, the operating fre-

quency of Split-16 decoder is 3.3 times that of MinSum decoder;

thus, if we simplify by assuming equal activities for both de-

signs, then effective lumped capacitance is decreasing at a rate

faster than the increased performance in terms of delay

(again, for simplicity, we assume that core logic gates have also

been unchanged)—see Fig. 15.

Fig. 15. Capacitance and maximum clock frequency versus the number of par-
titions Spn.
Additional savings to average power and energy (along with increased throughput) can be achieved through early termination, as mentioned in Section II-D. This technique checks the decoded bits every cycle and will terminate the decoding process when convergence is detected. The cost of the early termination circuit is the use of the already existing XOR signals (the sign calculation), which gives “1” and “0.” Parity is then checked through an OR gate tree with these XOR signals as inputs [5]. Postlayout results show that the early termination block for a (2048, 1723) code occupies only approximately 0.1 mm .
Fig. 16(a) shows the average convergence iterations for MinSum Normalized and Split-Row Threshold decoders for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOHSENIN et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM FOR REDUCED ROUTING CONGESTION IN LDPC DECODERS

1059

Fig. 16. Average convergence iteration and energy dissipation versus a large number of SNR values for five decoders using MinSum Normalized and MinSum Split-Row Threshold methods. (a) Average convergence iteration. (b) Average energy dissipation.

TABLE III

= COMPARISON OF FULLY PARALLEL DECODERS IN 65-nm 1.3-V CMOS, FOR A (6, 32) (2048, 1723) CODE IMPLEMENTED USING MINSUM NORMALIZED AND

MINSUM SPLIT-ROW THRESHOLD METHODS WITH DIFFERENT LEVELS OF SPLITTING. MAXIMUM NUMBER OF ITERATIONS IS I

11.

yTHE BER AND SNR VALUES ARE FOR 5-bit FIXED-POINT IMPLEMENTATIONS

a range of SNR values with

. At low SNR values Compared to MinSum Normalized decoder, MinSum

dB , most decoders cannot converge within Split-16 decoder is 4.1 times smaller, has a clock rate and 11 iterations. For SNR values between 3.0 and 3.8 dB, the throughput 3.3 times higher, is 4.8 times more energy efficient, average convergence iteration of MinSum Normalized decoder and has an error performance degradation of only 0.23 dB with

is about 30% to 8% less than the Split-Row Threshold decoder.

For large SNRs

dB , the difference between

the numbers of iterations for decoders ranges from 18% to

1%, indicating that all decoders can converge almost within

the same average number of iterations. Fig. 16(b) shows the

average energy dissipation per bit of the five decoders. The

MinSum Normalized decoder dissipates 3.4 to 4.7 times higher

energy per bit compared to the Split-16 decoder.

E. Summary and Further Comparisons
Table III summarizes the postlayout implementation results for the decoders.
The Split-16 decoder’s final logic utilization is 97%, which is 2.6 times higher than the MinSum Normalized decoder. The average wire length in each subblock of Split-16 decoder is 21
m, which is 4.4 times shorter than in the MinSum Normalized decoder. It occupies 4.84 mm , runs at 195 MHz, delivers 36.3Gbits/s throughput, and dissipates 37 pJ/bit with 11 iterations.

11 iterations.

At

, the average number of iterations of

Split-16 decoder is 1.15 times larger than MinSum Normalized

decoder, and it has a coding loss of 0.23 dB compared to

MinSum Normalized decoder. At this BER point, its average

decoding throughput is 92.8 Gbits/s, which is 2.9 times higher,

and dissipates 15 pJ/bit, which is four times lower than the

MinSum Normalized decoder.

At a supply voltage of 0.7 V, the Split-16 decoder runs at

35 MHz and achieves the minimum 6.5-Gbits/s throughput

required by the 10GBASE-T standard [10] (which requires 6.4

Gbits/s). Power dissipation is 62 mW at this operating point.

These results are obtained by interpolating operating points

using the measured data from a recently fabricated chip on the

exact same process [33].

F. Comparison With Other Implementations
The MinSum Split-16 Threshold decoder postlayout simulation results are compared with recently implemented decoders

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2010

TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF THE SPLIT-16 THRESHOLD DECODER WITH THE PUBLISHED LDPC DECODER IMPLEMENTATIONS FOR THE 10GBASE-T CODE. 3THROUGHPUT IS COMPUTED BASED ON THE MAXIMUM LATENCY REPORTED IN THIS PAPER

[6], [28] for the 10GBASE-T code and are summarized in can be up to 3 times smaller with 6.8 times more throughput

Table IV. Results for two supply voltages are reported for the and 4.2 times lower energy consumption.

Split-16 decoder: Nominal 1.3 and 0.7 V, which is the minimum voltages that can achieve the 6.5 Gbits/s throughput required

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

by the 10GBASE-T standard. The partial parallel decoder chip [6] is fabricated in 65-nm
CMOS and consists of a two-step decoder: MinSum algorithm and a postprocessing scheme which lowers the error floor down

The authors would like to thank P. Urard for the key algorithmic contributions, Dr. S. Lin for the LDPC codes and assistance, and Dr. Z. Zhang.

to

. The Sliced Message Passing (SMP) scheme

REFERENCES

in [28] is proposed for Sum Product algorithm, divides the check node processing into equal-size blocks, and performs the check node computation sequentially. The postlayout simulations for a partial parallel decoder are shown in the table.
Compared to the two-step decoder chip [6], the Split-16 decoder is 1.1 times smaller, has 1.9 times higher throughput, and dissipates 3.9 times less energy, at a cost of 0.3 dB coding gain reduction. Compared to the SMP decoder [28], Split-16 decoder is about three times smaller and has 6.8 times higher throughput with 0.2-dB coding gain reduction.

VII. CONCLUSION

This paper has given a complete, detailed, and unified presen-

tation of a low-complexity message-passing algorithm, called

Split-Row Threshold, which utilizes a threshold-enable signal

to compensate for the loss of

interpartition information in

Split-Row algorithm (original). It provides at least 0.3-dB error

performance improvement over the Split-Row algorithm with

. Details of the algorithm with a step-by-step matrix

example, along with BER simulations, are given.

The architecture and layout of five fully parallel LDPC

decoders for 10GBASE-T using MinSum Normalized and

MinSum Split-Row Threshold methods in 65-nm CMOS have

been presented.

Postlayout results show that, when compared with the

MinSum Normalized decoder, Split-16 Threshold decoder has

2.6 times higher logic utilization, is 4.1 times smaller, has a

clock rate and throughput 3.3 times higher, is 4.8 times more

energy efficient, and has an error performance degradation of

0.23 dB with 11 iterations. At 1.3 V, it can attain up to 92.8

Gbits/s, and at 0.7 V, it can meet the necessary 6.4-Gbits/s

throughput for 10GBASE-T while dissipating 62 mW. In

comparison to other published LDPC chips, Split-16 decoder

[1] D. J. C. MacKay, Information Theory Inference and Learning Algorithms, 3rd ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[4] A. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate 1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[5] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[6] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “A 47 Gb/s LDPC decoder with improved low error rate performance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits, Jun. 2009, pp. 286–287.
[7] T. T. S. I. Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) Second Generation Framing Structure for Broadband Satellite Applications [Online]. Available: http://www.dvb.org
[8] IEEE 802.16e. Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE p802.16e/d12 Draft, Oct. 2005.
[9] G.hn/G.9960. Next Generation Standard for Wired Home Network [Online]. Available: http://www.itu.int/ITU-T
[10] IEEE P802.3an, 10GBASE-T Task Force [Online]. Available: http:// www.ieee802.org/3/an
[11] T. Mohsenin and B. Baas, “Trends and challenges in LDPC hardware decoders,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Nov. 2009.
[12] D. J. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[13] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[14] T. Mohsenin and B. Baas, “Split-Row: A reduced complexity, high throughput LDPC decoder architecture,” in Proc. ICCD, 2006, pp. 320–325.
[15] T. Mohsenin and B. Baas, “High-throughput LDPC decoders using a multiple split-row method,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP, Apr. 2007, vol. 2, pp. II-13–II-16.
[16] T. Mohsenin and B. Baas, “A split-decoding message passing algorithm for low density parity check codes,” J. Signal Process. Syst., 2010, to be published.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOHSENIN et al.: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM FOR REDUCED ROUTING CONGESTION IN LDPC DECODERS

1061

[17] T. Mohsenin, P. Urard, and B. Baas, “A thresholding algorithm for improved split-row decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Nov. 2008, pp. 448–451.
[18] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “An improved split-row threshold decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Jun. 2009, pp. 1–5.
[19] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “Multi-split-row threshold decoding implementations for LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISCAS, May 2009, pp. 2449–2452.
[20] S. Lin and D. J. Castello, Jr., Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[21] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[22] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, and M. Fossorier, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[23] R. Lynch, E. M. Kurtas, A. Kuznetsov, E. Yeo, and B. Nikolic, The search for a practical iterative detector for magnetic recording vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 213–218, Jan. 2004.
[24] E. Morifuji, D. Patil, M. Horowitz, and Y. Nishi, “Power optimization for SRAM and its scaling,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 715–722, Apr. 2007.
[25] M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[26] H. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Shi, and D. Wang, “Layered approx-regular LDPC: Code construction and encoder/decoder design,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 572–585, Mar. 2008.
[27] Y. Dai, N. Chen, and Z. Yan, “Memory efficient decoder architectures for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2898–2911, Oct. 2008.
[28] L. Liu and C.-J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
[29] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D.J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[30] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[31] P. Saxena, R. S. Shelar, and S. S. Sapatnekar, Routing Congestion in VLSI Circuits, 1st ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2007.
[32] I. Djurdjevic, Xu J., K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[33] D. N. Truong, W. H. Cheng, T. Mohsenin, Z. Yu, A. T. Jacobson, G. Landge, M. J. Meeuwsen, C. Watnik, A. T. Tran, Z. Xiao, E. W. Work, J. W. Webb, P. V. Mejia, and B. M. Baas, “A 167-processor computational platform in 65 nm CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 1130–1144, Apr. 2009.

Tinoosh Mohsenin received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, and the M.S. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at the University of California, Davis.
She is the Designer of the Split-Row, multisplit, and Split-Row Threshold decoding algorithms and architectures for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. She was a Key Designer of the 167-processor Asynchronous Array of simple Processors chip. Her research interests include algorithms, architectures and VLSI design for high-performance and energy-efficient computation in the areas of networking and communications, digital signal processing, and error-correction applications.
Dean N. Truong received the B.S. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of California, Davis, in 2005, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
He was a Key Designer of the second generation 167-processor 65-nm CMOS Asynchronous Array of simple Processors chip. His research interests include high-speed processor architectures, dynamic supply voltage and dynamic clock frequency algorithms and circuits, and VLSI design.
Bevan M. Baas received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, in 1987 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 1990 and 1999, respectively.
From 1987 to 1989, he was with Hewlett-Packard, Cupertino, CA, where he participated in the development of the processor for a high-end minicomputer. In 1999, he joined Atheros Communications, Santa Clara, CA, as an early Employee and served as a Core Member of the team which developed the first IEEE 802.11a (54 Mbits/s; 5 GHz) Wi-Fi wireless LAN solution. In 2003, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, where he is currently an Associate Professor. He leads projects in architecture, hardware, software tools, and applications for VLSI computation with an emphasis on DSP workloads. Recent projects include the 36-processor Asynchronous Array of simple Processors chip, applications, and tools; a second-generation 167-processor chip; low-density parity-check decoders; fast Fourier transform processors; Viterbi decoders; and H.264 video codecs. He also serves as a Member of the Technical Advisory Board of an early stage technology company. During the summer of 2006, he was a Visiting Professor at the Circuit Research Laboratory, Intel Corporation. Dr. Baas was a National Science Foundation fellow from 1990 to 1993 and a NASA Graduate Student Researcher Fellow from 1993 to 1996. He was a recipient of the National Science Foundation CAREER Award in 2006 and the Most Promising Engineer/Scientist Award by the American Indian Science and Engineering Society in 2006. Since 2007, he has been an Associate Editor for the IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS. He has served as a member of the Technical Program Committees of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Design and the IEEE International Symposium on Asynchronous Circuits and Systems, and the Program Committee of the Hot Chips Symposium on High Performance Chips.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:26:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

