Construction of Codes Protographes LDPC QuasiCycliques Based on an Arithmetic Progression

I. DIOP; S .M FARSSI Polytechnic school of Cheikh Anta Diop University of
Dakar Senegal; Email: idydiop@yahoo.fr;farsism@yahoo.com

M.BA; H. B DIOUF;
Polytechnic school of Cheikh Anta Diop University of Dakar Senegal

Résumé: Dans ce document, nous étudions la construction de codes LDPC quasi cycliques basée sur un protographe. En plus de leurs grands périmètres, les codes présentés bénéficient des avantages du codage et décodage de basse complexité. L’objectif recherché à travers cet article est d’apporter une amélioration sur l’implémentation des codes LDPC quasi-cycliques. Ainsi pour respecter la structure du protographe de base nous utilisons une progression arithmétique pour déterminer d’avance les positions de certains nœuds de contrôle dans le graphe dérivé, ce qui revient en quelque sorte à générer un nouveau modèle en procédant à un lift du protographe de base. Une fois ce nouveau model conçu nous appliquons les techniques habituelles pour construire de manière optimale le graphe dérivé.
Mots clés : LDPC, QC-LDPC, PEG, matrice de Vandermonde, Protographe
Abstract—In this document, we study the construction of codes LDPC quasi cyclic based on a protograph. In addition to their large perimeters, the presented codes take profit from the advantages of bass coding and decoding complexity. The aim of this article is to make an improvement on the implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. Thus to respect the structure of the basic protograph we use an arithmetic progression to determine in advance the positions of certain nodes of control in the derived graph, which turn to some extent amounts generating a new model while proceeding to an enlarging of the basic protograph. Once this new model conceived we apply the usual techniques to build in an optimal way the derived graph.
Index Terms—LDPC, Regular, QC-LDPC, PEG, Matrix of Vandermonde, Protograph.
I. INTRODUCTION (HEADING 1)
The low density parity check codes (LDPC) were proposed for the first time in 1963 by Gallager [1]. At that time, even if it was found very interesting on the theoretical level, these work found little echo, that was mainly due to the limits of material architectures at the time. Put aside for a long time, it is thirty years later, with the advent of the turbo-codes [2] and the description of the “turbo” principle related to iterative decoding that these codes re-appeared in 1996 [3]. It is especially the work of Thomas J. Richardson and Rudiger Urbanke [4, 5] who allowed a notorious projection on the knowledge and the optimization of the structure of these codes. For ten years now, the whole of undertaken research have made it possible to

reach the same degree of maturity as the turbo-codes [6] and make them good candidates in the standards. Currently, LDPC codes from their increasingly powerful capacity and their low complexity of decoding continue to draw the attention of the scientific community of research on coding. However, the implementation of such codes turn out very complex, and in general the complexity of coding develops quadratically (or slower [7]) with the length of the block. A LDPC code is described by its hollow matrix of parity check (P.C.M) or by its tan graph[8].This document is mainly based on the construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes proposed by Nicholas Bonello and al [9]. More explicitly we propose a new approach to generate a regular PCM built on blocks matrix of Vandermonde [10]. The advantage of studied construction is to obtain a quasicyclic (QC) form [11] which significantly reduces the complexity of coding in the length of the block [12]. In addition the associated complexity of decoding is reduced by adopting a construction based on a descriptor, which is also indicated under the name of protograph by J. Thorpe [13]. These codes can be decoded by semi-parallel, as proposed by Lee and al. in [14]. The contribution brought in this document is to propose a new construction of the PCM based on an new approach which not only makes it possible to build codes regular quasi-cyclic protograph, but in addition conforms to the nature even of architectures used in particular those of the shift registers. The document is structured as follows: section 2 introduced the basic principles of structured codes LDPC and codes LDPC built on a protograph. Section 3 described and explains construction proposed. Finally the section 4 presents the results obtained.
II. STRUCTURED BINARY LDPC CODES
For LDPC codes the structure of the PCM (matrix of parity check) can be regular or irregular. A code is regular if the number of elements per line (respectively by column) is constant. A code is irregular if it is not, by definition, regular. We consider a binary LDPC code of PCM H built on GF (2), then, suppose the PCM made up of m lines and of N columns, the density of this code becomes R = 1 - m/n. This can also be represented by means of a binodal graph, commonly called factorial graph [15] or bipartite Tanner graph [16, 17], being composed of the m nodes of control and N nodes of variable. More explicitly, we

978-1-4673-2679-7/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

194

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:20:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

consider a regular code having a uniform degree of edges emerging from each node of control and variable. The degrees of the nodes of variable and control will be respectively indicated by γ and ρ, which also corresponds to the weight of column and line of the PCM. LDPC Codes are typically decoded by using the algorithm nap-product (SPA) [18], where messages are permuted between the nodes residing on the two sides of the graph. The independence of these messages is characterized by the length of the shortest cycle on the graph, which is typically indicated under the name of “girth” G.

A. Codes LDPC based on the protographs
The protograph codes were introduced by J. Thorpe [13]. By definition, a protograph is a bipartite graph of small size from which we build a larger graph by a procedure known as “copies and permutations”, during which the protograph is duplicated in certain number of times, then the branches of the duplicated graphs are permuted by complying with certain structural rules. The protograph is generally described by its matrix of H adjacency, also called basic matrix [19] [20], where the coefficients H (I, J) represent the number of branches between the i-th node of control Ci and the j-th node of Vj variable of the protograph. The procedure of construction of a binary LDPC code based on a protograph illustrated by figure 1. This procedure perhaps recapitulated as follows:
· Stage of copy: The protograph is recopied T time to obtain T counterparts. T is selected in an arbitrary way to obtain the desired size of the word of code. On the example illustrated by figure 2 T= 3.
· Stage of permutation: The branches of the various counterparts are permuted between the various counterparts in order to obtain a larger graph. Figure 3 illustrates perfectly the operation of permutation between T=3 copies of the protograph.
The set of permutations must satisfy the topological structure of the initial protograph. Let us note that that build code, can be seen like a big size projection of the basic model from where the acronym “projected graph”. Consequently, the branches of the graph obtained correspond to the not null entries of the matrix of parity H associated o this bipartite graph, and thus define a code LDPC said “structured”.
Let us consider the basic protograph, G, described by the whole of the nodes of control C={cti: t=1 ; i=1,…, m}, the whole of variable nodes V= {vti: t=1 ; i = 1, … n} and the whole of edges E, where |E|= m.ρ = n.γ ; m and n respectively indicate the number of nodes of control and variables of the basic protograph.

fig. 1: example of “copies and permutation”
The basic photograph will t have a PC size (m, n). After permutation of T copies, we obtain the graph of the resulting code, G', defined by the units It, V' and E', where each unit has a size, which is T time larger than the corresponding whole in the basic protograph. The permutations of the edges of the nodes in the derived graph obey certain constraints, which will be discussed in section 3.
B. Construction of LDPC codes based on a protograph
Two big branches of construction are then possible. The first family returns to techniques of algebraic construction of structured cyclic or quasi-cyclic codes [12]. The second rests algorithms of pseudo-random construction such as algorithms PEG (Progressive Edge Growth) [21].
· Construction by PEG: This method simply consists in considering pseudo-random permutations by assigning the branches of the graph, group’s nodes of variables by nodes group of variables.
· Construction based on circulating matrices This method uses matrices of circulating permutations; the assignment is done either by branch (edge) but by group of T branches via the assignment of the matrix of permutation.
The matrix H resultant of this last method is a version known as “lifting /enlarging” (increased) and the parameter T is often indicated like the order of enlarging. The matrix H resultant of this last method is a version known as “lifting” and the parameter T is often indicated like the order of enlarging. Moreover resulting code LDPC will be quasi-cyclic: indeed, any shift of a word of code is again a word of code. That allows an easy encoding by shift registers what has as a consequence a good degree of parallelism of architectures of decoding, from where the attraction for these codes known as structured. The structure of quasi-cyclic codes LDPC builds on a protograph is subjected to two major constraints:
· Drawback (1): The fact of using a regular PCM as basic graph imposes a certain structural regularity on the derived graph with knowing of the weights of line (ρ) and column (γ) fixed.
· Drawback (2): With this first drawback a second is added which is the quasi-cyclicity induced by a

195 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:20:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

construction based on protograph in other words the manner of permuting the edges.

III. CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR CODE PROTOGRAPH QC_LDPC

A. Construction of the basic protograph

Since we want to build quasi-cyclic codes protograph, we

use a construction based on the matrix of Vandermonde. This

method stays primarily on the construction of the matrix of

noted permutation P. The matrix P is a matrix whose Pmn

elements are such as:

Pmn = îíì10

if m = (n -1) mod q otherwise

(1)

with q > (ρ - 1) (γ -1), 0 £ m £ q et 0 £ n £ q

Example, for q=3, the pq and pq2 matrixes of

permutations are given by:

æ0 1 0ö

æ0 0 1ö

pq

=

ç çèç

0 1

0 0

1 0

÷ ø÷÷

and

pq2

=

ç èçç

1 0

0 1

0 0

÷ ø÷÷

(2)

The matrix of permutation as the example shows it above has the following properties:
· It is a square matrix of order q
· If r = q then The basic protograph (PCM based on the construction of the matrix of Vandermonde) with the following configuration:

æ ç ç

Iq Iq

Iq Pq

Iq Pq2

L L

Iq P(ρ-1)
q

ö ÷ ÷

H

=

ç ç

Iq

Pq2

Pq4

L

P2(ρ-1) q

÷ ÷

(3)

çM M

MM

M÷

çè Iq

P(γ-1) q

P2(γ-1) q

L

P(γ-1)(ρ-1) q

ø÷

Thus the basic matrix H is of size (γq × ρq).

where

Pqx

=

ìíïIq if x mod q = 0

ïîPx modq q

otherwise

(4)

B. Construction of the derived graph
The construction of the derived graph is determined by the basic protograph and can be described in two principal stages:
· The widening of the basic graph “lifted matrix” In the approach suggested, the choice of the enlarging term is not free, because we seeks for widenning the graph to tan basic while respecting the two constraints (cf 2.3) related on the construction and the structure even of the basic graph. · Copy and permutation of the widened graph. The new basic model obtained after enlarging is projected to give the derived graph. It is important to notice a fundamental property of the enlarging which imposes

systematically on the widened graph the same number of nodes of variables as the basic graph. Thus to build the derived graph it will occur to parallel place (T-1) copies of new the model conceived. The procedure to be followed is recapitulated in algorithm 2.

C. Description and analyzes of construction’s algorithm
The algorithm is composed of two distinct parts: The first part (line 1 with line 15) consists of carrying out the enlarging of the basic graph (represented by the matrix G of size (mT,nN). It is a stage impossible to circumvent of construction suggested. To start one adopts the principle of algorithm PEG [21], i.e. for each node of variable, one traverses all the incidental nodes of control to this node of variable. This amounts generating the vicinity (under graph) for each node of variable considered [13]. Thus under graphs on the basis of each variable node are obtained by unfolding the graph To tan basic according to the width [21]. The first constraint makes it possible to pre-empt the positions of the nodes of incidental controls to the node of variable concerned in the derived graph. In fact the determination of the whole nodes of variables in the final configuration is established according to an arithmetic progression of reason T and so that the first term of this progression is the incidental node of control having the low degree.
Algorithme 2 : construction of derived graph

Inputs : H, T Output : G’ H (m, n), G’= matrix (m T, nT) P = matrix (mT, nT), G = matrix (mT, n) BEGIN

1 for j=1 à n
C={i}où C(1)<C(2)<...C(n)

2

and 1 £ i £ m / H (i,j) ¬ 1 b

3 for k= [(j-1).T+1] à jT

4

for i=1 à mT

5

if k = (j-1) T+1 alors

6 7

for x=1 à cardinal (C) P ([1+T(C(x)-1)], k)

¬

1

8

End

9

End

10

End

11 End

12 13

for i=1 g(i,j)

à¬mTP(i

,

[(j-1)T+1])

14 End

15 End

16 17

for j=1 for k

à ¬n

((j-1)

T+1)

à

jT

18

for i=1 à mT

19 20

if kG=’(j(-i1, )k)T+¬1 aglo(ir,sj)

21

End

196 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:20:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

22

End

23 End

24 End

25 establishing connections between nodes of control and variables not yet connected similarly to PEG (modified) [9]
END
The fundamental idea is to find the node of the most distant control then to place a new edge formed by the node of symbol and this node of control while taking account of the constraints. The interest of such a process is to determine a new structure which the form approaches more that of the basic protograph in an environment where MT nodes of control are present instead of m nodes.

Thus in a general way the new position of the node of

control is given by the following arithmetic progression:

C n

íìC0 îCn

=1 =C
0

+T(n

-1)

(5)

Where T represents the reason of the continuation, N is the

position of the node of incidental control to the node of

variable concerned in the basic graph and Cn indicates the new

position of the node of control in the derived graph. By fixing

the edges of the top spin graph we obtain a derived graph

which respects the structure of the basic PCM initially built on

the matrix of Vandermonde. Thus the top spin graph counts n.γ

edges which will be fixed, in other words n.γ nodes of control

from which the positions in the graph derived are given by the

arithmetic progression defined by (Cn).

If we take the example of the node of V13 variable of the

basic graph G the whole of the nodes of control which are

incidental for him is C= {C11, C14} respectively occupying

the positions n=1 and n=4.

Thus the positions of these nodes in the derived graph are

given by: C1= 1 and C4=10 what is illustrated perfectly by

figure 1 (b).

The second part of the algorithm (line 16 with line 30)

allows projecting the basic graph top spin. This projection

consists in parallel laying out T-1 counterparts of the new

model. Since the final graph represents an enlarging of order T

of the basic graph it is necessary to pre-empt the position of the

nodes of variable in the final configuration. These new

positions are given by considering T blocks of N nodes of

variables where the j-th node of variable of the basic graph

occupies the first position of the j-th block. The last stage of

construction consists in placing the remaining edges. Since the

top spin graph count n.γ fixed edges and that the derived graph

must be made up of (n.γ.T) then the number of connection to

establish will be equal to n.γ (T-1). These connections will be

established between the n.ρ. (T-1) free nodes of variables and

nodes of control remaining by using the algorithm of the PEG

modified [9] in order to optimize the parameter of the derived

graph.

In short this new approach allows a construction not

requiring traversing all the edges to determine the “edges of

them allowed” and the “prohibited edges” it is based on the combination of the principles of the PEG and construction per block of circulating matrices.
IV. RESULTS AND SIMULATIONS A. Construction of the matrix of parity
The results of simulation presented were obtained by implementing algorithm 2 proposed in section 3. We consider a basic protograph H of size (27,45) having for weight γ=3, ρ=5 and which will be copied 5 times to obtain a quasi-cyclic PCM noted G'. H is the PCM of the code protograph LDPC, G' is obtained by copy and permutation of 5 identical protographs H (fig.2) thus the number of edges of G' (many edges = 675) is 5 times more important than that of H (many edges = 135). H and G' have the same structure (fig. 3).
Fig.2: Fives copies of H (γ=3; ρ=5)
Fig.3: Derived graph G’(γ=3 ; ρ=5)

197 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:20:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. EVALUATION OF COMPLEXITY To evaluate the complexity of the algorithm 2 several
measurements were taken starting from a computer equipped with a processor Intel Pentium 4 CPU 3.06GHz and equipped with a physical memory total of 1015 Mo.
The results obtained are represented by curves of complexity. Each curve specifically represents the execution time of N derived graphs having jointly the same basic protographe.
Thus to each value of N (1İ N İ15) corresponds a graph derived built starting from N copies from a basic graph whose matrix is noted H, the execution time of the process is expressed in second. The results of simulation show a linear complexity for protographes of weight column ¤ İ 4 and one quadratic complexity for a weight of column ¤ ı 4. The longest the execution time (about 6s) corresponds to that of the implementation of a graph derived from perimeter 8 of size (2790, 3255) made up of 19530 edges.
Fig.4: Plots of complexity
References [1] R.G. Gallager. “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”. MIT Press,
1963. [2] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux. Near optimum error correcting
coding and decoding”.IEEE Transactions on Communications, 44(10):1262–1271, January 1996. [3] David. J. C. MacKay.“Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices”. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 45(2):399– 431, March 1999. [4] Thomas J. Richardson and Rudiger Urbanke. The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing

decoding. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 47(2):599–618, February 2001.
[5] Thomas J. Richardson, Amin Shokrollahi, and RudigerUrbanke. “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density paritycheck” codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 47(2):619–637, February 2001.
[6] R.M. Pyndiah.” Near-optimum decoding of product codes: block turbo codes”. Communications, IEEE Transactions on, 46(8):1003 –1010, aug. 1998.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of lowdensity parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.
[8] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[9] N. Bonello, Sheng Chen, LajosHanzo “Construction of Regular Quasi-Cyclic Protograph LDPC codesbased on Vandermonde Matrices”, IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology, vol. 57, no. 4, july 2008
[10] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, 2000, vol. 3, pp. 543–546.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc.37th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 1999, pp. 249–259.
[12] R. M. Tanner, “Spectral graphs for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 226
[13] Jeremy Thorpe. “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs”. Technical report, JPL Interplanetary Network Progress (INP) Report 42-154, August 2003.
[14] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes”. IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[15] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.A. Loeliger. “Factor graphs and the sum product algorithm”. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 47(2):498–519, February 2001.
[16] R.M.Tanner. “A recursive approach to low complexity codes”. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 27:533–547, September 1981.
[17] N. Wiberg. “Codes and decoding on General graphs”. Diisertation nr 440, Dept. Of Electrical Engineering, Link¨oping, Sweden, October 1996.
[18] J. K. S. Lee, B. Lee, J. Thorpe, K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Hamkins, “A scalable architecture of a structured LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 27–Jul. 2, 2004, p. 292.
[19] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin. “Channel Codes: Classical and Modern”. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[20] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke. “Modern Coding Theory”. Cambridge University Press, 2008
[21] Xiao-Yu Hu, Evangelos Eleftheriou, and Dieter M Arnold. “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs”. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 51(1):386–398, January 2005.
[22] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C.R. Jones, and K. Andrews. “Capacityapproaching protograph codes. Selected Areas in Communications”, IEEE Journal on, 27(6):876–888, aug. 2009.
[23] A. Venkiah. “Analysis and Design of Raptor Codes for Multicast Wireless Channels”. PhD thesis, Universit´e de CergyPontoise, November 2008.

198 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:20:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[24] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2000.

199 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:20:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

