Min-Sum Algorithm Based Efficient High Level Methodology for Design, Simulation and Hardware
implementation of LDPC Decoders

Abdessalam.Ait madi,Ali.Ahaitouf Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah University, Faculty of Sciences and Technology, Signals Systems and Components
Laboratory B.P, 2202, Fez, V.N 30000 Morocco
aitmadi_abdessalam@yahoo.fr ali_ahitouf@yahoo.fr

Anas.Mansouri
Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah University, National School of Applied Sciences of Fez, Signals Systems and Components Laboratory, Fez, Morocco anas_mansouri@yahoo.fr

Abstract—A Variable Node Processing Unit (VNPU) and a Check Node Processing Unit (CNPU) are designed in order to be used in Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) decoding by the Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA). The designed blocks are fully parallel and flexible to be used for different block length when a regular (3, 6) LDPC codes are required. The proposed VNPU and CNPU have been first designed and implemented in software using Simulink tool following a modular design approach. In a second step, these blocks were described and simulated using Very High Speed integrated circuits Hardware Description Language (VHDL). Comparison between these two implementations shows that the proposed high level methodology is efficient to test and validate digital circuits before being implemented on desired Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) device.
Keywords-MSA, LDPC, VHDL, hardware, implementation, FPGA.
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes are widely used in more applications for next generation data assessment such Digital Video Broadcasting for the second generation digital satellite and terrestrial television broadcasting system (DVB- S2) [1], (DVB-T2) [2]. The LDPC codes [3] can be efficiently decoded with the original belief-propagation (BP) algorithm or the sum-product algorithm (SPA). The BP algorithm is recognized by its good error correcting performance [4] but needed many multiplications to update check and variable nodes which make it difficult to use for efficient hardware implementation. Several modified versions of the BP decoding algorithm have been introduced such log-likelihood ratio belief propagation (LLR-BP) in which the multiplications are transformed in additions. In spite of this considerable simplification, the LLRBP remains still more difficult for digital circuits’ implementation. In fact it need the Look-Up Table (LUT) to implement the hyperbolic tangent and the involution transform
function - log(tanh(x)) in the “ tanh- rule ” and the
Gallager’s approach LLR-BP based algorithm. Indeed, the use

of the LUTs introduces quantization effects and decoding delay leading to some performances degradation. Thus, the nonLUT-based approaches, which employ only combinational logic only, were introduced in order to avoid the unbreakable delay of LUTs. For example the MSA algorithm [5, 6] which greatly reduces the hardware implementation complexity and computations induces no negligible performance degradation due to the overestimation in the outgoing message from the check to variable node. Despite this drawback the MSA remains the main approximated version that consumes less area.
Designing the entire LDPC decoder in VHDL becomes a very difficult task when the sizes of the parity check matrix increase. The LDPC decoders can be constructed using a modular approach and the basic LDPC decoding operations. So it is possible to use auxiliary tools in this development. In order to test and validate the design a simple Matlab application script receives the parity check matrix of the code, interprets it and accordingly, creates and connects a full set of module units needed to implement the required LDPC decoder.Before implementing the designs into FPGA devices we can use high level abstraction to verify its functionality. In this case the CNPU and the VNPU designs are first developed and tested in the Simulink tool. The VHDL codes are then written by hand. After checking errors and warnings in ModelSim, the correctness of the functionality is verified by using a test bench written also in VHDL. The modules developed in VHDL codes are integrated in a Simulink tool for co-simulation [7] by using Electronic Design Automation (EDA) Simulator Link for direct hardware design verification. The Matlab script is used to call and connect the integrated blocks and sends stimuli to running designs to be validated and tested. As response, the designs outputs are sent back to the matlab script. The most advantage of the co-simulation is the real system testing, therefore suppressing all possible misinterpretations present in a pure simulator. In other cases, co-simulation may be the only way to simulate a complex design in a reasonable amount of time.
In the following, in section II the processing units VNPU and CNPU for LDPC decoder are developed. The section III

978-1-4673-2679-7/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

218

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

describes the details for the VNPU and the CNPU designing in Simulink tool while the implementation in VHDL codes of its processing units is developed in section IV. Finally, the simulation results are shown in the section V and section VI concludes the paper.
II. PROCESSING UNITS FOR LDPC DECODER
Iterative decoder can be constructed by considering each variable node (VN) and check node (CN) of the tanner graph [8] as processing units, and a connection between them as a bidirectional communication channels through which the processed information is sent. Since, the decoder works on the soft information, the sent messages between nodes are real values. In order to represent these values in fixed-point two’s complement representation for reduced hardware implementation, we need to quantize them authorizing some performance loss as a result of the quantization.
A. VN Processing unit: VNPU

B. CN Processing unit: CNPU
This module receives dc inputs. In the same way as the VNPU, each input is a s bit fixed-point two’s complement
representation number. To implement the managed CNPU mathematical equation in hardware we separate the operation into sign and magnitude calculations of the two incoming messages according to the following equation.

out = sign(a).sign(b).min( a , b )

(1)

Figure 2 represents a simplified boxplus unit shown in [8] for two inputs a and b in which the overall sign Final_sign is performed by using a logical two input, sign(a) and sign(b), XOR operator. The Final_sign signal is set to zero for the positive sign and to one elsewhere. By using a mux block, the output min or –min of the comparator will be driven to the signal out taking into account the sign of the Final_sign signal value.
To construct a modular CNPU, the boxplus unit will be

The architecture of the VNPU is the same as the other LDPC decoder designs [9]. In fact, the parallel design can be
developed with only combinatorial logic. Therefore, the dv
( ) (degree of VN) successive Lm®n xn messages coming from
the CNPU are added together with the messages
( ) L xn yn coming from the channel in order to form the
( ) variable node output value Zn xn . The most significant bit ( ) (MSB) of Z n xn is the sign bit which is used for hard

instantiated in parallel manner to carry out the dc (degree of
( ) CN) messages Lm®n xn . The complexity of the boxplus
operation on the parallel implementation requires a boxplus
chain of dc inputs. As results the number of gates required
increases when compared to serial or semi parallel configuration. In spite of this disadvantage, parallel configurations are still used for high throughput applications.

Sign

Final_sign

XOR

decision to estimate the nth bit in the received word from the

Sign

channel, one for the negative value and zero for the positive
( ) value .To update each output Zn®m xn in each iteration, the ( ) corresponding message value Lm®n xn sent from the CN ( ) m to the VN n should be subtracted from Zn xn (see figure
1). This type of implementation requires an adder å capable of
adding dv +1 inputs of s bits fixed-point two’s complement

a

Abs

min

out

Comparator

Mux

Abs

-min

b

Figure 2. Boxplus diagram considering parallel configuration.

representation as well as dv outputs s bits subtractors to
perform dv subtractions, where s is the length of binary
fixed-point number. This means that a high number of gates is required to implement just a single processing unit, but has the great advantage of a minimum delay system (high throughput).

III. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE VNPU AND THE CNPU DESIGNS IN SIMULINK TOOL
The VNPU ms_vnp36_top shown in figure 3 has been designed in Simulink using basic adder block from the Simulink library. The variable node has fourth inputs the first three in_vn1, in_vn2 and in_vn3 are coming from various check nodes to which they are connected and the fourth one is

the LLR message coming from the channel communication

( ) Lm®n xn

å

Sign

xˆn

system. The VNPU unit passes the outputs out_vn1, out_vn2 and out_vn3 to the check nodes and then the hard decision is

Sub

( ) Zn®m xn making, to estimate the nth bit in the received word..

Figure 1. VNPU block diagram considering parallel configuration: update of
the message sent from VN n to CN m

To emulate quasi similar hardware functionality the blocks set used in this design works in fixed-point two’s complement format with a fixed word length to 8 bits, the MSB bit corresponding to the sign, the next two MSBs bits represent the integer part and the five remain bits represent the fractional

219 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

part. Thus, all the data will be delimited in the [minimum, maximum] interval in the 8 bit fixed-point two’s complement format. Consequently, if a value computed by the block is outside this interval, it will be immediately replaced by the maximum (respectively minimum) value achievable in the used representation, depending on the sign.
The Simulink design in figure 4 represents the CNPU ms_cnp36_top. It uses various blocks from Simulink library (absolute, min, xor, switch…). The block have six outputs, a positive value |out_cni| (i=1 to 6) is the minimum of the fifth value |in_cnj| (j=1 to 6 and j#i), as example |out_cn1| is the minimum of the set (|in_cn2|, |in_cn3|, |in_cn4|, |in_cn5|,
Õ |in_cn6|).The product sign(in _ cnj) is the sign of j ¹1
out_cn1. All the blocks used in this design works also in 8 bits fixed-point two’s complement representation, in the same way as the VNPU design.
The functionality of these designs can be verified using Simulink tool. Once the two Simulink designs VNPU and CNPU are verified and tested, we used the Matlab script to connect them in order to construct the LDPC decoder.
Figure 3. VNPU design in the Simulink tool for dv = 3 considering
parallel configuration.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE VNPU AND THE CNPU DESIGNS USING VHDL CODES
The work consists of transforming the two developed designs into computerized representation by using the Very High speed Hardware Description languages (VHDL). The blocks used in these designs are described and tested individually following a modular approach. After checking the eventual errors and warnings in each module, all the elements were wired to produce the required top designs. The VNPU top design ms_vnp36_top includes six adders, three unary minus operator and one comparator to zero which is used to make the hard decision. The CNPU ms_cnp36_top include twelve instantiated boxplus unit connected by internal signals. Each boxplus is implemented according to the figure 2. All the blocks used in this designs works in 8 bits fixed-point two’s complement representation.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Validation of the Simulink design
The Simulink environment is used in this design approach. On figure 5, the test vector (0.5,-1, 1,-1) is applied to the VNPU unit designed in the Simulink tool, the outputs are (-1, 0.5, 1.5, 1). From this result, one can see that the estimated bit value is one. We can also see the equivalent in 8 bits fixed-point of the inputs in (in1_sf, in2_sf, in3_sf, llr_sf) displays. As seen in figure 6, the CNPU units also designed in the Simulink tool yield the output vector (0.4375, -0.4375, 0.4375, -0.4375, 0.4375, -0.437) as a result for the corresponding 8 bits fixedpoint inputs values (0.4375, -1.969, 1.438, -4, -0.4375, 0.9688) displayed in (in1_sf, in2_sf, in3_sf, in4_sf, in5_sf, in6_sf).From this example of simulation, the output magnitude |out_cn1| is equal to 0.4375, which correspond to the minimum value of the set (1.969, 1.438, 4, 0.4375, 0.9688). Because, the number of a negative sign in the set (-1.969, 1.438, -4, 0.4375, -0.9688) is even, the sign of the output out_cn1 will be positive.

Figure 4. CNPU design in the Simulink tool for dc = 6 considering
parallel configuration.

B. Validation of the VHDL design
In the same way as in the Simulink designs, similar test vectors are applied to the VHDL model via a testbenchs written furthermore in VHDL. The VNPU and the CNPU behavioral simulations are shown in figure 7 and 8, which represents both the inputs and the outputs, signals in 8 bits fixed-point two’s complement representation, and their equivalent in real format. The signs of the inputs and the outputs values are indicated by the MSBs value, a zero in MSB yield a positive result otherwise the results is negative. As example, the VNPU output value out_vn1 is 11100000 in binary 8 bits fixed-point two’s complement representation and -1 in real representation, for the CNPU the magnitude value |out_cn1| is 00001110 in binary 8 bits fixed-point two’s complement format when 0.4375 is his value in the real format. It can be easily seen that

220 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

we obtain the same results as shown above in Simulink design simulation.

C. Simulink and ModelSim Co-simulation
In this simulation, the co-simulate hardware VNPU and CNPU HDL inputs signals are coming from Simulink while the HDL outputs signals are driven back to the Simulink tool. In order to validate and test behavioral simulation of these VHDL models, the same stimuli used above in the Simulink designs simulations are applied to the HDL designs (see figure 9 and 10). One can clearly, see that the similar results are obtained when comparing these HDL modules behavioral simulations with their corresponding in the Simulink tool.
D. MSA algorithm performances

A regular LDPC code (10, 5) check matrix H is used in this prototype design in the same way as in ref [10]. It is very smaller than matrix used in reality. The fixed degree node of each VN and CN are three and six, respectively. Encoded bits are binary-phase-shift-keying (BPSK) modulated and transmitted over the simulated Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. The number of maximum iterations is set to 16 at each Signal to Noise ratio (SNR) Eb/N0 value. For each SNR value, the codeword of length 10 have been transmitted until 2000 errors occurred or 500 codeword transmitted. The simulation program halts when the decoded codeword is valid or the maximum of the number of iterations is reached. In order to validate and simulate hardware implementation, the processing unit VNPU and CNPU designed in Simulink tool are called from the Matlab script application. The test scenario of the HDL co-simulation is as follow:
· The VNPU designed by the Simulink tool is used.
· The CNPU unit designed in VHDL is used as the cosimulate HDL component module instance in the Simulink tool.
· The matlab script application calls and connects the VNPU and CNPU designs to emulate the hardware implementation LDPC decoder using MSA algorithm.
Figure 11 shows the BER (Bit-Error-Rate) versus SNR, obtained for the LDPC decoder from Matlab in floating and fixed point. One can clearly see the good agreement between the performances in term of the BER of the MSA algorithm in floating-point and 8 bits fixed-point representation.
When comparing the MSA implementation both in Matlab, with VNPU and CNPU in the Matlab script managed Simulink and the designed VNPU in the Simulink associated to the VHDL CNPU modelization, we obtain quasi similar performances of the BER versus SNR evolution as shown on figure 12. The messages exchanged between the modules are all represented in 8 bits fixed-point two’s complement format.

Figure 5. VNPU functional validation in Simulink tool Figure 6. CNPU functional validation in Simulink tool

221 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8 bits Fixed-point representation for both inputs and
outputs

8 bits Fixed-point format converted
into real representation

Output set to one Figure 7. VNPU functional validation in ModelSim tool

Figure 9. VNPU functional validation in HDL co-simulation using Simulink tool and ModelSim VNPU functional validation in HDL co-simulation using Simulink tool and ModelSim

8 bits Fixedpoint
representation for both inputs and
outputs

8 bits Fixed-point format converted
into real representation. The input value 10 is saturated on integer overflow -4

Figure 8. CNPU functional validation in ModelSim tool

Figure 10. CNPU functional validation in HDL co-simulation using Simulink tool and ModelSim

222 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

EDA Simulator Link for use with Mentor Graphic ModelSim is

used to allow communication between hardware component

10-1

MSA,8 bits Fixed-Point MSA,Floating-Point

and Simulink model. The proposed strategy yield great advantages in terms of design complexity and development

time.

Bit-Error-Rate BER

10-2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Signal-to-Noise Ratio Eb/N0,(dB)

Figure 11. BER obtained for LDPC decoder from Matlab in Floating and Fixed point

MSA ,Matlab,8 bits Fixed-Point

10-1

MSA,Simulinlk,8 bits Fixed-Point

MSA,Co-simulation,8 bits Fixed-Point

Bit-Error-Rate BER

10-2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Signal-to-Noise Ratio Eb/N0,(dB)

REFERENCES

[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications. Draft ETSI EN 302 307 V1.1.1 (2004-06). European Standard (Telecommunications series).

[2] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame structure, channel coding and modulation systems for second generation digital terrestriel television broadcasting system (DVB-T2). Draft ETSI EN 302 755 V1.1.1 (200909). European Standard (Telecommunications series).

[3] R.G.Gallager, “Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[4] D.J.C.Mackay,”Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Trans on information Theory, Vol .45, No. 2, March 1999, pp.399-431..

[5] M.P.C.Fossorier,M.Mihaljevic,H.Imai, “Reduced Complexity Iterative Decoding of Low Density Parity Check codes based on Belief Propagation,” IEEE Trans.Commun, Vol. 47,No.5, May 1999, pp. 673– 680,.

[6] J.Chen,A.Dholakia,E.Eleftheriou,M.Fossier,X.-Y.Hu,

”Reduced-

Complexity Decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans On

Communications ,Vol 53,No. 8, August 2005, pp. 1288-1299.

[7] A.Ait madi,A.Mansouri,A.Ahaitouf,”Design,Simulation and Hardware implementation of Low Density Parity Check Decoders using Min-Sum Algorithm,” IJCSI,Vol.9,No.3, March 2012.

[8] R.M.Tanner,”A recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,”IEEE Trans on information Theory, September 1981, Vol.IT-27, No.5, pp.533547.

[9] G.Falcao, M.Gomes, J.Goncalves, P.Faia, V.Silva,“HDL Library of Processing Units for an Automatic LDPC Decoder Design,” IEEE PhD.Research in Microelectronics and Electronics (PRIME),pp.349-352, September 2006.

[10] S.M.Aziz, M.D.Pham,”Implemetation of Low Density Parity Check Decoders using a New High Level Design Methodology,” Journal of Computers, Vol.5, No.1, January 2010, pp.81-90.

Figure 12. BER obtained for LDPC decoder from Matlab, Simulink, ModelSim and Simulink co-simulation

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have proposed an efficient high level modular approach to design the VNPU and the CNPU blocks for the MSA. It uses Matlab, Simulink and ModelSim. The

223 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

