5972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2012

Reweighted LP Decoding for LDPC Codes
Amin Khajehnejad, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Babak Hassibi, Benjamin Vigoda, and William Bradley

Abstract—We introduce a novel algorithm for decoding binary linear codes by linear programming (LP). We build on the LP decoding algorithm of Feldman et al. and introduce a postprocessing step that solves a second linear program that reweights the objective function based on the outcome of the original LP decoder output. Our analysis shows that for some LDPC ensembles we can improve the provable threshold guarantees compared to standard LP decoding. We also show significant empirical performance gains for the reweighted LP decoding algorithm with very small additional computational complexity.
Index Terms—Error correction, LDPC codes, LP decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L INEAR programming (LP) decoding for binary linear codes was introduced by Feldman et al. [1], [2]. The method is based on solving a LP relaxation of the integer program corresponding to the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding problem. LP decoding is connected to message-passing decoding [3], [4], and graph covers [5], [6] and has received substantial recent attention (see, e.g., [6], and [7]).
As with the work described here, a related line of work has studied various improvements to either standard iterative decoding [8], [9] or LP decoding via nonlinear extensions [10] or loop corrections [11].
The practical performance of LP decoding is roughly comparable to min-sum decoding and slightly inferior to sum-product decoding. In contrast to message-passing decoding, however, the LP decoder either concedes failure on a problem or returns a codeword along with a guarantee that it is the ML codeword, thereby eliminating any undetected decoding errors.
The main idea of this paper is to add a second LP as a postprocessing step when original LP decoding fails and outputs a fractional pseudocodeword. We use the difference between the
Manuscript received March 14, 2011; revised September 27, 2011; accepted May 11, 2012. Date of publication June 01, 2012; date of current version August 14, 2012. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCF-0729203, CNS-0932428, and CCF-1018927, in part by the Office of Naval Research under the MURI Grant N00014-08-1-0747, in part by Caltech’s Lee Center for Advanced Networking, and in part by DARPA FA8750-07-C-0231. The material in this paper was presented in part at the Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2010.
A. Khajehnejad and B. Hassibi are with the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91106 USA (e-mail: amin@caltech.edu; hassibi@ caltech.edu).
A. G. Dimakis is with the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA (e-mail: dimakis@usc.edu).
B. Vigoda and W. Bradley are with Lyric Semiconductors Inc., Cambridge, MA 02142 USA (e-mail: vigoda@lyricsemiconductor.com; bill.bradley@ lyricsemiconductor.com).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2202211

input channel likelihood and the pseudocodeword coordinate to find a measure of disagreement or unreliability for each bit. We subsequently use this unreliability to bias the objective function and rerun the LP with the reweighted objective function. The reweighting increases the cost of changing reliable bits and decreases the cost for unreliable bits. We present an analysis that the provable BSC recovery thresholds improve for certain families of LDPC codes. We stress that the actual thresholds, even for the original LP decoding algorithm, remain unknown. Our analysis only establishes that the obtainable lower bounds on the fraction of recoverable errors are improved compared to the corresponding bounds for LP decoding. It is possible, however, that this is just an artifact of the lower bounding techniques and that the true threshold is identical for both algorithms. In any case, the empirical performance gains we observe in our preliminary experimental analysis seem quite substantial.
The central idea in our analysis is a notion of robustness to changes in the BSC bit-flipping probability. This concept was inspired by a similar reweighted iterative minimization idea for compressive sensing [21], [20]. We note that the reweighting idea of this paper involves changing the objective function of the LP from the reweighted max-product algorithm [12].

II. BASIC DEFINITIONS

A vector in is called -sparse if it has exactly nonzero

entries. The support set of a sparse vector is the index set

of its nonzero entries. If is not sparse, the -support set of

is defined as the index set of the largest entries of in

magnitude. We use

to denote the norm of a vector

for

. In particular,

is defined to be the number of

nonzero coefficients of . For a set , the cardinality of is

denoted by . If

, then is the subvector

formed by those entries of indexed in . Furthermore, the

complement set of is denoted by , and is defined by

. The rate of a linear binary code is denoted

by , and is defined as the ratio of the codeword length to the

message length. More specifically, if the parity check matrix of

is

, then is the length of each codeword in ,

is the length of the message mapped to a codeword, and

.

The Tanner (factor) graph corresponding to is denoted by

, where and are the sets of variable nodes and

check nodes, respectively, and is the set of edges. The parity

check matrix of a code is in fact the adjacency matrix of

the bipartite Tanner graph . For a variable node

, the

set of the neighbors of in is denoted by . Similarly,

for a check node

, the set of the neighbors of in is

denoted by . Furthermore, for a subset of the nodes of a

Tanner graph (either variable or check nodes),

denotes

the set of the neighbors of the nodes in . For regular Tanner

graphs, and denote the degree of variable and check nodes,

respectively. The girth of a graph , denoted by

, is

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHAJEHNEJAD et al.: REWEIGHTED LP DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

5973

defined to be the size of the smallest cycle in . Finally,

and

are the symbols for probability and expected value,

respectively.

III. BACKGROUND

. Furthermore, since the coefficients of pseudocodewords

in the marginal polytope are in , we may replace the Ham-

ming distance

with the distance

.

This implies that the decoder (3) is equivalent to

Suppose that is a memoryless channel with binary input

and an output alphabet , defined by transition probabilities

(4)

. For a received symbol , the log-likelihood ratio is

defined as

, where is the transmitted symbol.

If a codeword of length from the linear code is trans-

mitted through the channel, and an output vector is re-

ceived, a ML decoder can be used to estimate the transmitted

codeword by finding the most likely transmitted input codeword.

Let be the likelihood ratio assigned to the th received bit in

, and be the likelihood vector

. The

ML decoder can be formalized as follows [1]:

The aforementioned formulation can be interpreted as follows: for a received output binary vector , the solution to the LP decoder is essentially the closest (in norm) pseudocodeword to .
LP decoding was first introduced by Feldman et al. [1], [2]. Subsequently, in [13] it was shown that if the parity check matrix is chosen to be the adjacency matrix of a high-quality expander, LP decoding can correct a constant fraction of errors. A fundamental lemma in [2] and used in the results therein is

that the marginal polytope has the same topology seen from

every codeword. Consequently, for the analysis of LP decoding, (1) it can be assumed without loss of generality that the transmitted

where

is the convex hull of all the codewords of in

. The linear program (1) solves the ML decoding problem

by the virtue of the fact that the objective is minimized at

a corner point (a.k.a. vertex) of

, which is necessarily

a codeword. In fact, the set of vertices of

is equal to

a set of the codewords of . Since decoding for general linear

codes is NP hard, it is unlikely that

can be efficiently

described through a polynomial number of linear (or convex)

inequalities. Feldman et al. introduced a relaxation of (1) by

replacing the polytope

with a new polytope that has

much fewer facets, contains

, and retains the codewords

of as its vertices [1]. One way to construct is the following.

If the parity check matrix of is the

matrix and if

is the th row of , then

codeword is the all-zero codeword. The theoretical results of [13] were based on a dual witness
argument, i.e., a feasible set of variables that set the dual of LP equal to zero, and thus guarantee that the original codeword is the minimizer of the objective function over the entire marginal polytope. However, the bounds on success threshold of LP decoding achieved by this technique are considerably smaller than the empirical recovery threshold of LP decoder in practice. A later analysis of LP decoding by Daskalakis et al. [14] improved upon those bounds for random expander codes, through employing a different dual witness argument, and considering a weak notion of LP success rather than the strong notion in [13]. A strong threshold means that every set of errors of up to a certain size can be corrected, whereas a weak threshold implies that almost all error sets of a certain size are recoverable.

(2) Note that there is a gap of about one order of magnitude between the error-correcting thresholds of [14] and those observed

where

. is called the LP

polytope or the marginal polytope for the code , and its vertices

are called pseudocodewords, including all of the codewords in

. In addition to these codewords, has other redundant ver-

tices with fractional coefficients in

. Moreover, if a pseu-

docodeword is integral, i.e., if it has 0 or 1 coefficients, then it

is definitely a codeword. The LP relaxation of (1) over the mar-

ginal polytope is as follows:

in practice. The arguments of [13] and [14] are based on the existence
of dual certificates that guarantee the success of the LP decoder and require codes that are based on bipartite expander graphs. A more recent work of Arora et al. uses a quite different certificate based on the primal LP problem [15]. This approach results in fairly easier computations and significantly better thresholds for LP decoding. However, the underlying codes discussed in [15] are based on factor graphs with a large girth (at least doubly

logarithmic in the length of the codewords, ), rather than un-

(3) balanced expanders considered in previous arguments. Note that similar to [14], the bounds of [15] are weak bounds, certifying

The number of facets of is exponential in the maximum that for a random set of errors up to a fraction of code length, LP

Hamming weight of a row of , and polynomial in . There- decoding succeeds with high probability, for sufficiently large .

fore, for LDPC codes with constant row density, has a poly- The largest such fraction is called the weak recovery threshold.

nomial number of facets. Consequently, (3) is solvable in poly- A somewhat related problem to the LP decoding of linear

nomial time.

codes is the compressed sensing (CS) problem. In CS an un-

For channels with binary outputs, (3) can be expressed in a known real vector of size is to be recovered from a set of

more intuitive way. In this case, minimizing the log-likelihood linear measurements, represented by

, where

objective is equivalent to minimizing the Hamming dis-

, and

. This is in general infeasible, since the mea-

tance between the codeword and the output of the channel, surement matrix is underdetermined and the resulting system

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5974

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2012

of equations is ill-posed, i.e., it can have infinitely many solutions. However, imposing a sparsity condition on can make the solution unique. The unique sparse solution can be found by exhaustive search for instance, which is formulated by the following minimization program:
(5)
Since (5) is NP-hard, one possible approximation is to relax the norm of to the closest convex norm , which results in the well-known minimization

the form of additional bit flip reliability. This information can be utilized in further processing steps such as reweighted linear program to improve the overall performance of the decoder. We discuss these issues in proceeding sections.

Definition 1: Let be a parity check matrix. Define and

to be the set of rows and columns of . Also, for each

,

define

. The fundamental cone,

, of is the set of all vectors

that

satisfy

(7) (8)

(6)

is the smallest cone in that encompasses the polytope

Equation (6) is a linear program, which can in general be solved in polynomial time. There has been substantial theoretical work on this LP relaxation; see, e.g., [18], [19], [23], [24], and [26]

. If a vector lies on an edge of , it is called a minimal pseudocodeword. For simplicity, in the sequel, we use instead of
whenever there is no ambiguity.

Recently, systematic connections between the problems of channel coding LP and CS relaxation have been found [16], [17]. In this paper, we build on those bridges to improve LP decoding, and further extend the ideas of robustness and reweighted minimization in CS to channel coding LP.

Definition 2: Let

and

be fixed. A

code with parity check matrix is said to have the funda-

mental cone property

, if for every nonzero vector

the following holds:

(9)

IV. EXTENDED CERTIFICATE AND ROBUSTNESS OF LP DECODER
The success of LP decoder can be certified by the existence of a dual witness [13], [14]. Similarly, for minimization in the context of CS, a dual witness certificate can guarantee that the recovery of sparse signals is successful [22]. However, it has proven more promising to express the success condition of
minimization in terms of the properties of the null space of the measurement matrix [23]–[25]. The condition is called the null-space property, through which it is possible to characterize one class of “good” measurement matrices for CS, namely matrices that are congruent with minimization decoding. The advantage of the null-space interpretation, apart from the fact that it results in sharper analytical bounds, is that with proper

If for every index set of size , has the

, then

we say that has the fundamental cone property

.

In the next lemma, we show how the FCP can be used to

evaluate the performance of an LP decoder, even when it fails

to recover the true codeword. The key assumption here is that

the channel is a bit flipping channel, i.e., the channel output has

binary format.

Lemma 4.1: Let be a code that has the

for some

subset of bits and some

. Suppose that a codeword

from is transmitted through a bit flipping channel, and the

received codeword is . If the nonzero pseudocodeword

is the output of the LP decoder for the received codeword ,

then the following holds:

parametrization, it can also be used to evaluate the performance

of minimization in the presence of noise. This is known as the

(10)

robustness of minimization. A consequence of the robustness

property is that when minimization fails to recover a sparse

Proof: Without loss of generality, we may assume that the

signal, it often gives a decent approximation to it [20]. To the all-zero codeword was transmitted, i.e.,

. We have

best of our knowledge, a similar certificate has not been intro-

duced in the context of channel coding LP. In other words, when

LP decoding fails to return an integral solution, it is not known

how close the resulting pseudocodeword is to the original code-

word. We answer this question in the following way. We in-

troduce a property of arbitrary linear codes called the funda-

mental cone property (FCP), and show that for communication

channels with binary outputs, FCP is related to the robustness of

(11)

the solution of the LP decoder over the marginal polytope of the considered code. The robustness of LP decoding has two consequences. First, it implies that the linear program is tolerant to limited mismatch in implementation. Second, it implies that the

(a) is true because from (4),

.

Also, (b) holds by the triangular inequality. Note that

, so by definition,

. This implies that

pseudocodeword obtained by LP decoding provides additional

probabilistic information about the structure of the bit errors in

(12)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHAJEHNEJAD et al.: REWEIGHTED LP DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

5975

Applying this to the left-hand side of (11), we obtain

The third analysis of the LP decoder was done by Arora et al.

[15], which is based on factor graphs with a doubly logarithmic

girth. Unlike previous dual feasibility arguments, the authors in

(13) [15] introduce a certificate in the primal domain, which is of the

following form: if in the primal LP problem, the value of the

which is the desired result.

Note that Lemma 4.1 can serve as a certificate for the suc-

cess of LP decoder. More specifically, let be the index set

of the flipped bits in the transmitted codeword, i.e., the set of

bits that differ in and . If

holds for some

, then Lemma 4.1 implies that LP decoding can success-

objective function for the original codeword is smaller than its value for all vectors within a local deviation from the original codeword, then LP decoder succeeds. Local deviations are defined by weighted minimal local trees whose induced subgraphs are cycle-free. These concepts are explained in detailed in the sequel.

fully recover the original codeword. Now suppose that the error

set (i.e., the set of flipped bits) is a superset of , with cardi-

nality slightly larger than . Then the vector

has a few (but not too many) nonzero entries. Therefore, even if

the LP decoder output is not equal to the actual codeword,

it is still possible to obtain an upper bound on its distance to

the unknown codeword. We recognize this as the robustness of

LP decoder, and characterize it by

, for

. We

define two notions of robustness here. Strong robustness means

that for every set of up to some cardinality , the

holds. Equivalently, this means that

holds. Weak ro-

bustness on the other hand is an almost all notion, meaning that

for a random set of up to a certain size , the

holds with high probability. In Section V we present a thorough

analysis of LP robustness for two categories of codes: expander

codes and codes with

girth. For these two classes

of codes, rigorous analysis has been done on the performance of

LP decoders in [13]--[15], respectively. We build on the existing

arguments to incorporate the robustness condition and analyze

the FCP.

A. Strong LP Robustness for Expander Codes

Strong thresholds of LP decoding for expander codes are de-

rived in [13], through the use of the dual of the linear pro-

gram (3). Assume that the all-zero codeword was transmitted,

showing that it is the optimal solution to the LP decoding which

is equivalent to the log-likelihood vector being an internal

point of the dual of the cone . This can be easily verified by the

definition of the dual cone and the formulation of (3). In [13], it

is shown that the existence of a set of dual feasible variables is

a sufficient condition for being an internal point of the dual of

. Here, we take the notion of dual feasible variables and relate

it to the robustness of LP decoding, through the FCP property.

Recall that the factor graph of is denoted by

.

A dual feasible set is defined as follows.

Definition 3: For a given log-likelihood vector

, a set of dual feasible variables is a labeling

of the edges of the factor graph , say

,

where the following two conditions are satisfied.

i) For every check node

and every two disjoint

neighbors of , say ,

, we have

V. SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR LP ROBUSTNESS

In most cases, if there exists a certificate for the success of

LP decoder, it can be often extended to guarantee that the LP

decoder is robust, namely that the FCP condition is satisfied for

some

. By carefully re-examining the analysis of LP de-

coder, one might be able to do such a generalization. This is the

main focus of this section. We consider three major methods

that exist in the literature for analyzing the performance of LP

decoders. The first one is due to Feldman et al. [13], and is

.

ii) For every variable node

, we have

.

We now show how a set of dual feasible variables can certify

FCP properties for a code. The key is the following lemma

which will be proved in Appendix A.

Lemma 5.1: Suppose that a set of dual variables satisfy the

feasibility conditions (Definition 3) for some log-likelihood

vector . Then for every vector

, the following holds:

based on using a dual witness type of argument to certify the success of LP decoder for expander graphs. The second one

(14)

is due to Daskalakis et al. [14], which also considers LP de-

coding in expander codes. Specifically, the authors of [14] ana- Now consider a subset of the bits and a constant

,

lyze the dual of LP and find a simple combinatorial condition for and let the vector

be

the dual value to be zero (implying that the LP decoder is suc- defined as follows:

cessful). The condition is essentially equivalent to the existence

of a so-called hyperflow from the set of nodes corresponding to

(15)

flipped bits to the set of nodes corresponding to unflipped bits in the Tanner graph of the code. The existence of a valid hyperflow can be secured by the presence of so-called -matchings.

Then it follows immediately from Lemma 5.1 and the definition of FCP that:

It then follows from a detailed series of probabilistic calcula- Corollary 1: If a set of dual feasible variables exists for

tions that -matchings of interest exist for certain expander

, then

holds.

codes. The main difference between this analysis and that of Consequently, whenever an appropriate set of dual feasible

[13] is the probabilistic nature of the arguments in [14], which variables exist, certain robustness conditions can be asserted for

account for the weak recovery threshold.

LP decoding. The existence of dual feasible sets was originally

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2012

(and only, to the best of the authors’ knowledge) done for the family of expander codes in [13]. Pursuing similar techniques, we can generalize the arguments for construction of dual feasible variables and obtain FCP properties for expander codes as follows. For the consistency and completeness of the discussions, we first mention the definition of expander graphs (codes).

Definition 4: Let

be a bipartite Tanner

graph with regular variable degree . is called a

-ex-

pander for

and

, if for every subset

of size less than or equal to ,

.

The following theorem is proved in Appendix B.

Theorem 5.1 (Strong Robustness of LP for Expanders.): Let

be the factor graph of a code of length and rate

. If is a bipartite

-expander graph for some

, then for

and

,

holds.

Definition 6: A tree of height is called a skinny subtree of , if it is rooted at some variable node , for every variable node in all the neighboring check nodes of in are also present in , and for every check node in exactly two neighboring variable nodes of in are present in .

Definition 7: Let

be a fixed vector. A vector

is called a minimal -local deviation, if there exists a skinny

subtree of of height , say , so that for every variable node

,

where

, and where

is the distance

between and in .

The key to the derivations of [15] is the following lemma.

Lemma 5.2 ([15, Lemma 1]): For any vector in the marginal

polytope , and any positive vector

, there exists a

distribution on the minimal -local deviations , such that

B. Weak LP Robustness for Expander Codes

We show that for random expander codes a probabilistic analysis similar to the dual witness analysis in [14] can be used to find the extents of the FCP for expander codes, in a weak sense. We rely on the matching arguments in [14], with appropriate adjustments. The following definition is given in [14].

Definition 5: For nonnegative integers and , and a set

of variable nodes, a -matching on is defined by the fol-

lowing conditions:

a) every variable node

must be matched with dis-

tinct check nodes, and

b) every variable node

must be matched with

where

.

Lemma 5.2 has the following interpretation. If a linear prop-

erty holds for all minimal -local deviations (e.g.,

,

where is a linear operator), then it also holds for all pseu-

docodewords of the marginal polytope (i.e.,

). Interestingly enough, the robustness of LP decoding over a

subset of entries has a linear certificate, namely

.1

In other words, if we define

(16)

check nodes in the set

, which are different from the

check nodes that the nodes in are matched to, where

is defined as

.

We prove the following theorem that relates the existence of a

-matching to the FCP of a code . This theorem is proved

in Appendix C.

Theorem 5.2 (Weak Robustness of LP for Expanders): Let be a code of rate with a bipartite factor graph
, where every variable node has degree . Let be a subset of the variable nodes. If a -matching on exists in , then has the

then

holds, if and only if

for every

pseudocodeword

. On the other hand, based on Lemma

5.2, in order to show that this condition holds, it suffices to show

that it is true for all minimal -local deviations. In other words,

one has to prove that

for all minimal -local

deviations . This simple observation helps us to extend the

probabilistic analysis of [15] to robustness results for LP de-

coding. The key theorem is mentioned below the proof of which

can be found in Appendix D. First, we define to be a random

variable that takes the value with probability and value

1 with probability . Also, define the sequences of random

variables , , , in the following way:

C. Weak LP Robustness for Codes With

Girth

(17)

Recall that

is used to denote the factor graph

of the parity check matrix (or of code ), where and

are the sets of variable and check nodes, respectively, and is

the set of edges. Also recall that the girth of is defined as the

size of the shortest cycle in . Without loss of generality, we

assume that

, where is the variable

where s are independent random variables with the same distribution as .
Theorem 5.3 (Weak Robustness of LP for High Girth Codes): Let be an LDPC code with length , Tanner graph , and regular check and variable degrees and , respectively. Also,

node corresponding to the th bit of the codeword. Let

1Note that this is only true for bit flipping channels, where the output alphabet

be fixed. The following notions are defined in [15]. is .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHAJEHNEJAD et al.: REWEIGHTED LP DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

5977

= 6 = 3 Fig. 1. Approximate upper bound for the robustness factor C as a function of error probability p for d

and d

, based on Theorem 5.3.

let If for some

, and be a random subset of bits of size . We refer to such decoder as a mismatched LP decoder. Since

the channel output is binary, the entries of all have the same

amplitude . We also define

, and assume that

. We can prove the following theorem.

where

, then

with probability of at least

the

code has the

, where is any integer with

.

For

and

, a lower bound on the robustness

parameter that results from Theorem 5.3 is plotted against

the probability of bit flip , in Fig. 1.

VI. IMPLICATIONS OF LP ROBUSTNESS

Theorem 6.1 (Mismatch Tolerance of LP Decoder): Suppose

that is the set of bit errors. Let

. If has

,

then the mismatched LP decoder corrects all errors and recovers

the original codeword.

Proof: We assume without loss of generality that the all-

zero codeword is transmitted. We show that if

holds,

then the all-zero codeword is the minimum cost vector in the

polytope . Suppose is a nonzero vector in the fundamental

code . We begin with the definition of

and write

A. Mismatch Tolerance

(18)

One of the direct consequences of the robustness of LP decoding is that if there is a slight mismatch in the implementa- Multiply both sides by

tion of the LP decoder, its performance does not degrade sig-

nificantly. More formally, suppose that due to noise, quantiza-

(19)

tion, or some other factor, a mismatched log-likelihood vector

is used to solve the linear program (3). In other We also know from the definition of that

words, despite the fact that the true log-likelihood vector is given to the decoder, an uncontrolled mismatch is intro-

, and

for

, and that

for . Therefore

duced when LP is implemented. This situation can happen for

(20)

instance, when a hardware implementation of the decoder is

considered. In that case, can be a stochastic vector resulting

from physical imperfections, and is only introduced after the which proves that the all-zero codeword is the unique minimum

true log-likelihood vector is given as the input to the decoder. cost solution of the mismatched LP.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2012

B. Pseudocodewords and High Error Rate Subsets

We showed in Section IV that for an appropriate code satisfying FCP, even when LP decoder fails to recover an actual codeword from the output of a bit flipping channel, the reconstruction error can be bounded [see (10)]. We now show that this property allows us to use the output of LP decoder to find a high error rate (HER) subset of the bits, namely a subset of bits over which the fraction of errors is significantly larger than the fraction of errors in the entire received codeword. We show that the size of such subset can be up to a constant fraction of the code length. Obtaining such importance subset is very crucial, since it provides additional reliability information about a significant proportion of the bits. Consequently, one can use this reliability information to bias the objective function and rerun a reweighted LP, or with additional soft/hard constraints. This forms the idea for the proposed iterative LP decoding algorithm which will be outlined in Section VII. In this section, we focus on the derivation of the HER subset using the robustness results of LP decoding.

Theorem 6.2 (Error Set Approximation of LP): Suppose that

a codeword is transmitted through a bit flipping channel,

and the output differs from the input in a set of the bits

with

, for some

and . Also,

suppose that for a subset

of size ,

holds for the considered code, for some

, and that the

optimal LP solution is the nonzero pseudocodeword . If

is the set of the

largest entries of the vector

in magnitude, then

(21)

Note that the aforementioned theorem provides a lower bound on the the fraction of errors in the received vector over the set . Consequently, if the resulting lower bound is large enough, the set can be though of as a HER subset of the bits. Also, note that the size of is a constant fraction of the code length. Theorem 6.2 is proved using the following definition and lemma, as follows.

Definition 8: Let

be a -sparse vector. For

,

we define

to be the size of the largest subset of nonzero

entries of that has norm less than or equal to , i.e.,

. If is the index set of the largest entries of in magnitude, then from Lemma 6.1 we have

(24)

where

. Since

nonzero entries, (24) can be written as

has only

(25)

We use the inequality in (10) to further lower bound the right-

hand side of (25). Recall that

is such that has

. Therefore, we can write

(26)

(27)

Dividing both sides by

, we conclude that at

least a fraction

of the set are errors.

VII. ITERATIVE REWEIGHTED LP ALGORITHM AND IMPROVED THRESHOLD
As stated in Theorem 6.2, by examining the deviation of the LP optimal (pseudocodeword) and the received vector, it is possible to identify a HER subset of bits in which the fraction of bit errors are higher than the overall probability of error. In other words, the code block can be divided into two regions and
, one with a large fraction of errors and the other one with a small fraction of errors. One way this imbalancedness can be exploited is by using a weighted LP scheme. This is outlined in the following iterative algorithm.

Algorithm 1 Reweighted LP Decoding.

1: Input: Marginal polytope , Received binary vector ,

Fixed parameters

and

.

2: Output: Approximation to .

3: Run LP decoding

(28)

4: If the output (22) 5: Set

is integral terminate, otherwise proceed. .

The following lemma is proved in [20].

Lemma 6.1 ([20, Lemma 1]): Let be a -sparse vector and

be another vector. Also, let be the support set of and

be the -support set of , namely the set of largest entries of

. If

, then

(23)

6: Sort the entries of in terms of absolute value, and denote by the index set of the largest entries.
7: Solve the following weighted LP and return the solution as the output:
(29)

Algorithm 1 is only twice as complex as LP decoding. Recall

Proof of Theorem 6.2: Define

, and apply that the subset obtained in step 6 of the algorithm is an ap-

Lemma 6.1 to the -sparse vector

, and the vector proximation for the original error set . The intuition behind

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHAJEHNEJAD et al.: REWEIGHTED LP DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

5979

the final reweighted LP decoding step and the choice of ,

is as follows. If the majority of the bits in are believed to be

errors, one possible approach to error correction is to flip all of

those bits in the received vector , in which case the number

of the errors will be reduced. If by doing so, the number of er-

rors in the new vector becomes significantly smaller (namely, if

the fraction of the errors in is significantly larger than 1/2),

it is more likely that LP decoding can correct all errors. Note

that flipping a subset of the bits and rerunning LP is equiva-

lent to negating the log-likelihood ratio assigned with those bits

and running the reweighted LP decoding, which is essentially

equivalent to a special case of the last step of Algorithm 1 with

and

. However, one might be able to do better

by selecting the weights more optimally. To see how that might

be, one should consider decoding codewords under nonuniform

error rate models. In this case, the code block can be divided into

two regions and , with respective error fractions and ,

where from the previous discussions we assume that

.

A similar more intuitive model to describe such nonuniformity

in the error structure is as follows: suppose that every bit in the

set is an error with probability , and every bit in is an

error with probability . If we write the ML estimation of the

codeword, it will be as (1), except that the vector does not

just consist of entries. The value of will be

if

, and

if

. Now if is very close to 1 and

is very close to 0, the log-likelihood ratio for a received bit

will have opposite signs whether or not it is in the set . That

is the basic motivation for the choice of negative signs for

and . In practice, one might have to to try a range of different

values for , depending on the available estimations on the

fractions , .

In the remainder of this section, we provide preliminary

analysis on the performance of the proposed method. Ideally,

one would be tempted to show that the recovery thresholds

of the reweighted scheme are higher than those of regular LP

decoding. We could not show this at this point. Instead, we

prove that the recovery threshold of the proposed reweighted

scheme is strictly higher than any “provable robust” threshold

that exists for LP decoding. To formalize the discussion, we

first define the recovery thresholds of LP decoding as follows.

Theorem 7.1 (Threshold Improvement of Algorithm 1): Let

and be, respectively, a robust strong and a robust weak

threshold for a code . There exist

,

,

, and

so that every error set of size

, and almost all

error sets of size

can be corrected by Algorithm 1.

To prove this theorem, we first consider decoding code-

words under nonuniform error rate conditions. Suppose that

we somehow know that the code block can be divided into

two regions with different error rates. The following lemma

shows that when there is such additional information about

the distribution of bit errors in a codeword, a regularized LP

decoding can be used.

Lemma 7.1: Suppose a codeword is transmitted through a binary channel. Also suppose that the bits of can be divided into two sets and , so that at least a fraction of the bits in are flipped, and at most a fraction of the bits in are flipped. Then, the following optimization program:

(30)

can recover , provided that

(31)

when

is a robust strong threshold of LP decoding.

Proof: We assume without loss of generality that the all-

zero codeword has been transmitted. We show that if the con-

dition of (31) holds, then for every nonzero pseudocodeword ,

the objective function in (30) is larger than that of the all-zero

vector, namely

(32)
To see this, suppose that the set of flipped bits is denoted by . Then, (32) is equivalent to

(33)

Definition 9 (Recovery Thresholds): For a given code of

sufficiently large code length, strong recovery threshold of LP

decoding is denoted by , and is defined as the largest fraction

such that every set of bit errors of size is recoverable via

LP decoding. Weak recovery threshold is denoted by , and

is defined by the largest fraction such that almost all sets of bit

error size are recoverable via LP. In contrast, a fraction

is called a robust strong threshold of LP decoding,

if for some constant

, and for every subset of bits of

size ,

holds. Similarly,

is a robust

weak threshold of LP decoding, if for some constant

, and

for almost all subsets of bits of size ,

holds.

Our next theorem states that the recovery thresholds of the

proposed iterative method are higher than every robust threshold

that one can prove for LP decoding.

or equivalently (34)

where

. However, note that if

holds for some

, then (34) is certainly

true. On the other hand, since the cardinality of is at most

which, by assumption is less than or equal

to , by definition, for some

,

holds. This

completes the proof.

Proof of Theorem 7.1: We set

and

.

Suppose without loss of generality that the all-zero codeword

has been transmitted, and the received binary vector has

errors, where

. By definition,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2012

holds for some

. Therefore, if we apply Theorem 6.2 to Draper and Yedidia [27], and the random facet guessing algo-

the output of LP, namely , we conclude that the set of rithm in [28]. The mixed integer algorithm reruns the LP de-

most deviated bits in with respect to , and the set of coding by setting integer constraints on a small subset of “least

the errors in have at least a fraction

overlap. certain” bits, namely the positions where the LP minimal pseu-

Define

and

. We must have

docodeword entries are closest to 0.5. We have taken the size

of the constrained subset to be

, which means that the

number of extra iterations is 32 for the mixed integer method.

(35) We also choose to run 20 more extra random iterations for facet guessing. In random facet guessing, a face (facet) of the poly-
(36) tope is selected at random, among all the faces on which the

LP minimal pseudocodeword does not reside. Then, LP decoder

Therefore, as

, we have that

and

. So, is rerun with the additional constraint that the solution is on the

for some small enough , the following will eventually hold: selected face. In contrast, Algorithm 1 has only one extra itera-

tion. All methods are simulated in MATLAB where LP decoder (37) is implemented via the cvx toolbox [29]. We have plotted the

Thus, according to Lemma 7.1, the weighted LP step of Algo-

rithm 1 corrects all errors. Similarly, if a random set of bits

are flipped, when

, by definition we can say that

with high probability there exists

so that

holds for a random subset of the bit errors of size .

Therefore, using Theorem 6.2, it follows that the set of most

deviated bits in with respect to , and the set of errors

in have at least an overlap fraction of

. The re-

mainder of the proof is the same as the case of strong threshold,

i.e., by applying Lemma 7.1.

BER curves versus the probability of error in Fig. 2. For Al-

gorithm 1, for each , we have experimentally found the optimal

and by choosing the values that on average result in the

best performance. For most of the cases, the chosen values were

in the ranges

and

. Observe

the superior BER performance of Algorithm 1 which becomes

more significant for smaller values of . For

, the BER

improvement in the reweighted LP method is at least one order

of magnitude. In our preliminary experimental evaluation, we

observe that the BER curves eventually collapse into the same

curve as the LP curve, except for the reweighted LP algorithm,

Note that the threshold improvements and can be com- which is an indication of the fact that the empirical thresholds puted explicitly from the robustness constant . As long as of Algorithm 1 are better than those of LP decoder and existing is strictly above 1 (and does not approach 1 as grows), the polynomial-time postprocessing methods.

threshold improvements will also be nonvanishing. Theorems 5.1 and 5.2 show that the robustness constant will indeed be constant that does not need to approach 1 asymptotically, as long as the degree and parameters in Theorem 5.1, and the parameters , , and in Theorem 5.2 remain constant. Further,

IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied postprocessing techniques for detecting codewords of a linear code transmitted through a bit flipping channel using LP decoding. We studied the output of

note that we only improve the provable robust thresholds for these families of codes. The true thresholds for LP decoding remain unknown and may remain asymptotically unchanged for the new decoding algorithm.
Note that according to Theorems 5.1 and 5.2, the recovery thresholds of LP decoding for expander codes proved in [13] and [14] are robust thresholds (see Definition 9). Therefore, ac-

LP decoder, and proved that aside from the known fact that

LP decoding solution is equal to the true codeword when the

number of errors is less than a constant fraction of code length,

it is not way far off from the actual codeword in other cases.

This is known as the robustness of LP decoding. We character-

ized LP robustness for two families of LDPC codes, namely ex-

pander codes and codes with

girth. The robustness

cording to Theorem 7.1, we can guarantee that our proposed algorithm has strong and weak recovery thresholds higher than those proved for LP decoding in the case of expander codes in previous works. In any case, in our preliminary simulation results, the proposed iterative algorithm shows empirical improvement over the regular LP decoding for certain families of

has two implications. First, if LP decoding is implemented with mismatched values of log-likelihood ratios, such as what might happen in a hardware implementation, then the solution is tolerant to certain levels of mismatch. Second, even when the LP decoder output is a nonintegral pseudocodeword, it can be used to derive critical information about the structure of the errors in

random LDPC codes, as will be demonstrated in Section VIII. the code block. We showed that it is possible to separate the code block into two regions with high and low error rates based on

VIII. SIMULATIONS

this premise. The unreliability information obtained in this way can then be used to bias the LP decoder, motivating a second

We have implemented Algorithm 1 on a random LPDC code weighted LP decoder. We described the whole procedure in a

of size

and rate

and have compared the two-step reweighted LP decoding algorithm. We proved that for

results with other existing methods. The variable node degree certain families of (expander) codes, the recovery thresholds of

is

, and thus,

. The code is generated based on a the proposed method are strictly higher than the existing thresh-

random model that uniformly selects a regular column and row olds for LP decoding. The exact bounds on the improvement

density matrix with uniform distribution over all such matrices. levels are not explicit at this point and are probably loose. Fu-

The algorithm is compared with the mixed integer method of ture work shall address tightening those bounds, and deriving

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHAJEHNEJAD et al.: REWEIGHTED LP DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

5981

= 1000 Fig. 2. BER curves as a function of channel flip probability p, for LP decoding and different iterative schemes; random facet guessing of [28], mixed integer

method of [27], and the suggested iterative reweighted LP of Algorithm 1. The code is a random LDPC(3,4) of length n

.

explicit numerical values for them, as well as the actual thresh- or equivalently olds of LP decoding.
(39)

APPENDIX A PROOF OF LEMMA 5.1

We first prove the following lemma.

Lemma A.1: Suppose

is a set

of dual feasible variables on the edges of the factor graph of

the code , for some arbitrary log-likelihood vector . Then for

every vector

and every check node , the following

holds:

Moreover, by the definition of and condition (i) of the dual

feasibility we have

for

. Therefore,

replacing with for each

does not decrease the

left-hand side of (39), and thus

(38)

Proof: We only use condition (i) of a feasible set of dual

variables. Note that among the variable nodes in

, there

can be at most one node with

. Let be such a variable

node. From the definition of , we can write

We now invoke Lemma A.1 that for every check node , . If we sum these inequalities for all check
nodes , we obtain

where and are the sets of variable and check nodes, respectively. Since are feasible variables, from condition (ii)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2012

of feasibility (Definition 3), we must have It then follows that

. neighbors of the variable node in the -matching on be

denoted by

. The check nodes are distinct

nodes. From the definition of , if

, then for each we

may write

(43)

APPENDIX B PROOF OF THEOREM 5.1
We basically repeat the argument of [13] with some slight adjustments. Let be the set of flipped bits, or interchangeably the set of corresponding variable nodes in the factor graph (we use to refer to the variable node corresponding to the th bit).

Definition 10 (

Matching From [13]): A

matching of the set is a set of edges of the factor graph

, so that no two edges are connected to the same check node,

every node in is connected to at least edges of , and

every node in is connected to at least edges of . Here,

is the set of variable nodes that are connected to at least

check nodes in

.

If there is a

matching on the set , then we consider

the following labeling of the edges of . For a check node ,

if it is adjacent to an edge in , then set

and

for every other variable node

.

Otherwise, label all of the edges adjacent to by 0. It can be

seen that for this labeling

satisfies condition (i) of dual

feasibility (Definition 3), and furthermore

(40)

We now take vector by

. Let us define a new likelihood (41)

We add all inequalities of (43) for

and

.

For , appears exactly times on the left-hand side of the

sum and, at most

times on the right. For , appears

in at most

inequalities and on the right-hand side. This

comes directly from the definition of a -matching on the

set . Therefore

(44) and thus
(45) which proves that has the desired FCP.

APPENDIX D PROOF OF THEOREM 5.3

We denote the set of variable nodes and check nodes by

and , respectively. For a fixed

, let be the set

of all minimal -local deviations, and be the set of min-

imal -local deviations that result from a skinny tree rooted at

the variable node . Also, assume that is the random set of

flipped bits, when the flip probability is . Interchangeably, we

also use to refer to the set of variable nodes corresponding to

the flipped bits indices. We are interested in the probability that

for all

,

. Recall that

If a dual feasible set exists that satisfies the feasibility condition

for the vector , then this implies that the

holds.

Now, since

, if we choose to be

(42)

For simplicity, we denote this event by

. Since

the bits are flipped independently and with the same probability,

we have the following union bound:

then it is clear that

. So the dual feasibility

condition is satisfied, if we can construct the required

matching for . From [13], if

, and is a bipar-

tite

expander, the desired matching exists. This proves

(46)

that of size

holds. Since this argument holds for every set

, we conclude that has

.

Now consider the full tree of height 2T, that is rooted at the

node , and contains every node in that is no more than

distant from , i.e.,

. We denote this tree by

APPENDIX C PROOF OF THEOREM 5.2

label, if

. To every variable node of

, we assign a

, which is equal to

if

, and is

, where

. We can now see

Consider a vector in the fundamental cone

of that the event

is equivalent to the event that for

the parity check matrix . Without loss of generality, we may all skinny subtrees of

of height , the sum of the

assume that

. For each

, let the labels on the variable nodes of is positive. In other words, if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KHAJEHNEJAD et al.: REWEIGHTED LP DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

5983

is the set of all skinny trees of height that are rooted at and can be chosen to jointly minimize

and

, then

is equivalent to

in the above, which along with (49) results in

(47)

where

denotes the set of nodes of that are in .

We assign to each node (either check or variable node) of

a random variable , which is equal to the contribu- where

and

tion to the quantity

by the offspring of

. If

, then the proba-

the node in the tree

, and the node itself. The value bility of error tends to zero as stated in Theorem 5.3.

of can be determined recursively from all of its children. Fur-

thermore, the distribution of only depends on the height of

in

. Therefore, to find the distribution of , we

use

as random variables with the same dis-

tribution as when is a variable node ( is assigned to the

lowest level variable node) and likewise

for

the check nodes. It then follows that

REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[2] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[3] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Linear programming-based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” presented at the 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Computing, 2002.

(48)

[4] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “MAP estimation via agreement on (hyper)trees: Message-passing and linear programming approaches,” presented at the Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., 2002.
[5] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding

where

are independent copies of a random variable ,

and is a random variable that takes the value with prob-

ability and value 1 with probability . It follows that

of finite length codes,” presented at the 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, 2003. [6] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” presented at the Int. Conf. Turbo Codes Related Topics, 2006. [7] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive linear programming de-

(49)

coding,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2006. [8] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-den-
sity parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 908–917, May 2001. [9] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of LDPC codes over the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 439–454,

The last inequality is by Markov inequality and is true for all . The rest of the proof we bring here is basically appro-
priate modifications of the derivations of [15] for the Laplace transform evolution of the variables and , to account for a nonunitary robustness factor . By upper bounding the Laplace transform of the variables recursively, it is possible to show that (see [15, Lemma 8], the argument is completely the same for our case)

Mar. 2004. [10] K. Yang, J. Feldman, and X. Wang, “Nonlinear programming ap-
proaches to decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2006. [11] M. Chertkov and V. Y. Chernyak, “Loop calculus helps to improve belief propagation and linear programming decoding of LDPC codes,” presented at the Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., 2006. [12] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “Exact MAP estimates via agreement on (hyper)trees: Linear programming and message-passing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3697–3717,

(50)

Nov. 2005. [13] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright,
“LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007. [14] C. Daskalakis, A. G. Dimakis, R. M. Karp, and M. J. Wainwright, “Probabilistic analysis of linear programming,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

for all

.

If we take the weight vector as

for some integer

, and use equation (50), we obtain

Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3565–3578, Aug. 2008. [15] S. Arora, D. Steuer, and C. Daskalakis, “Message-passing algorithms
and improved LP decoding,” presented at the ACM STOC Conf. 2009, . [16] A. G. Dimakis and P. O. Vontobel, “LP decoding meets LP
decoding: A connection between channel coding and compressed sensing,” presented at the Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., 2009. [17] A. G. Dimakis, R. Smarandache, and P. O. Vontobel, LDPC Codes for Compressed Sensing, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 3039–3114, May 2012. [18] D. Donoho, “High-dimensional centrally symmetric polytopes with

neighborliness proportional to dimension,” Discrete Comput. Geometry, vol. 102, no. 27, pp. 617–652, 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2012

[19] D. Donoho and J. Tanner, “Neighborliness of randomly-projected simplices in high dimensions,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 102, no. 27, pp. 9452–9457, 2005.
[20] A. Khajehnejad, W. Xu, S. Avestimehr, and B. Hassibi, “Improved sparse recovery thresholds with two-Step reweighted ` minimization,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2010.
[21] E. J. Candés, M. B. Wakin, and S. Boyd, “Enhancing sparsity by reweighted ` minimization,” J. Fourier Anal. Appl., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 877–905, 2008.
[22] E. J. Candès and T. Tao, “Decoding by linear programming,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 4203–4215, Dec. 2005.
[23] D. L. Donoho and X. Huo, “Uncertainty principles and ideal atomic decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2845–2862, Nov. 2001.
[24] M. Stojnic, W. Xu, and B. Hassibi, “Compressed sensing—Probabilistic analysis of a null-space characterization,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2008.
[25] A. Cohen, W. Dahmen, and R. DeVore, “Compressed sensing and best k-term approximation,” J. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 211–231, 2009.
[26] W. Xu and B. Hassibi, “On sharp performance bounds for robust sparse signal recoveries,” presented at the Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2009.
[27] S. C. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “Ml decoding via mixedinteger adaptive linear programming,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2007.
[28] A. G. Dimakis, A. A. Gohari, and M. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoder,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 3479–3487, Aug. 2009.
[29] [Online]. Available: http://cvxr.com/cvx/

Babak Hassibi was born in Tehran, Iran, in 1967. He received the B.S. degree from the University of Tehran in 1989, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Stanford University in 1993 and 1996, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
He has been with the California Institute of Technology since January 2001, where he is currently a Professor and Executive Officer of Electrical Engineering. From October 1996 to October 1998, he was a Research Associate at the Information Systems Laboratory, Stanford University, and from November 1998 to December 2000 he was a Member of the Technical Staff in the Mathematical Sciences Research Center at Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ. He has also held short-term appointments at Ricoh California Research Center, the Indian Institute of Science, and Linkoping University, Sweden. His research interests include wireless communications and networks, robust estimation and control, adaptive signal processing, and linear algebra. He is the coauthor of the books (both with A. H. Sayed and T. Kailath) Indefinite Quadratic Estimation and Control: A Unified Approach to H H Theories and (New York: SIAM, 1999) and Linear Estimation (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2000). He is a recipient of an Alborz Foundation Fellowship, the 1999 O. Hugo Schuck best paper award of the American Automatic Control Council (with H. Hindi and S. P. Boyd), the 2002 National Science Foundation Career Award, the 2002 Okawa Foundation Research Grant for Information and Telecommunications, the 2003 David and Lucille Packard Fellowship for Science and Engineering and the 2003 Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE), and was a participant in the 2004 National Academy of Engineering “Frontiers in Engineering” program.
He has been a Guest Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY special issue on “space-time transmission, reception, coding and signal processing,” was an Associate Editor for Communications of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY during 2004–2006, and is currently an Editor for the journal Foundations and Trends in Information and Communication.

Amin Khajehnejad received his Bachelors degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Tehran in 2007, and his Masters degree in Electrical Engineering from the California Institute of Technology in 2009. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate at Caltech. His general interests are in statistical signal processing, dimensionality reduction, coding, information theory, and optimization. He has had short term and consulting appointments at Lyric semiconductor Inc., NEC laboratories America, Inc., and D.E. Shaw & Co.

Benjamin Vigoda is a General Manager at Analog Devices: Lyric Labs. He received the B.A. degree from Swarthmore in 1996. While an Intel Fellow, he was awarded the Ph.D. degree from the Center for Bits and Atoms at MIT’s Media Lab in 2003. He worked at the Santa Fe Institute, Hewlett Packard Labs, and the Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL) before founding Lyric Semiconductor in 2006 (acquired by Analog Devices in 2011). Lyric builds hardware for performing probabilistic inference (such as error correction).

Alexandros G. Dimakis is an Assistant Professor at the Viterbi School of Engineering, University of Southern California. He has been a faculty member in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Systems since 2009. He received the Ph.D. degree in 2008 and the M.S. degree in 2005 in electrical engineering and computer science, both from the University of California, Berkeley. Prior to that, he obtained the Diploma degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the National Technical University of Athens in 2003. He received the Eli Jury award in 2008 for his thesis work on codes for distributed storage, two outstanding paper awards, the UC Berkeley Regents Fellowship, and the Microsoft Research Fellowship. He was a postdoctoral scholar at the Center for the Mathematics of Information (CMI) at Caltech in 2008. His research interests include communications, coding theory, signal processing, and networking, with a current focus on distributed storage, network coding, large-scale inference and message passing algorithms.

William Bradley is the Senior Lead Mathematician at Analog Devices: Lyric Labs and a Research Affiliate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He received the B.A. degree from Harvard (1995), the M.A.St. degree from the University of Cambridge (1996), and the Ph.D. degree in pure mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2002). While at MIT, he worked at Akamai Technologies, where he built dynamically evolving maps of the internet. He spent five years working on cryptographic and signal processing problems at IDA-CCR, a research institute in Princeton, prior to becoming Director of Research at Lyric Semiconductor in 2008 (acquired by Analog Devices in 2011).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:19:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

