CONSTRUCTION OF PARALLELIZED-DECODING LDPC CODES

Tsung-Che Wu, Chang-Ming Lee, Cheng-Kuei Wang Department of Communications Engineering, National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan
AIM-HI, National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan

ABSTRACT In the parallelization for high-throughput applications, the number of independent memory access usually dominates the coding throughput. Moreover, a class of large-girth low-density parity check (LDPC) codes usually has difficulties to realize the parallelization in the decoder. To cope with these obstacles, we propose an efficient code construction to take the number of required parallel decoding unit and the large-girth constraint into considerations at once. First, the parity check matrix would be split into the block-wise structure to fit the parallelization in the decoder. Second, the conversion of the cycle-checking inequalities can transform the girth issue into a linear system. Finally, based on the decomposition of the polyhedral set, the Smith normal form can efficiently solve inequalities of the proposed system. Simulation results show that the proposed code construction can satisfy the requirements of parallelization and high-performance coding with girth g = 12.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, code construction, large girth, parallelization
1. INTRODUCTION Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes have been widely applied in the communication system due to their near Shannon bound performance [1]–[3]. However, the bottleneck of the communication systems with LDPC codes is usually referred to the extremely high complexity in the LDPC decoder [4]. The resource-consumption introduced by the iterative delivery of messages based on the Tanner graph limits the decoding design for high-throughput applications. To overcome this issue, parallelization based on multiple processors in the LDPC decoder is attractive to realize the high-data-rate transmission. The difficulty for implementing parallel decoding mainly lies in the conflicts of memory access requested from different processors. The design in [5] can avoid the access conflict with additional buffers to store the update messages. Besides, LDPC codes with large girths are desirable due to the few self-reference in the message update. Considering LDPC codes with girth g, the sumproduct algorithm yields its optimal solutions only for the first g times of massage passing [1]. Therefore LDPC codes with small girths can neither achieve the near optimal decoding result, nor improve the coding performance by increasing iterations of message passing. Hence, the code construction for large-girth codes is preferable. Typical construction methods include finite-geometry construction [6][7], algebraic construction [8][9], and random or pseudorandom construction [2][3][7][10]. Though the algebraically constructed QC-LDPC codes perform quite well compared to random regular LDPC codes with short to moderate code lengths, the latter can perform better for long block-length codes. In opposition to the sophistical code construction, large-girth LDPC codes can also be obtained by using a random “guess-and-test”

algorithm [8]. In advance, the random regular LDPC codes of column weight J ≥ 3 are asymptotically good, in [11].
QC-LDPC codes are practical according to the low-complexity computation and their regularity. In the encoder side, the quasicyclic structure of the parity check matrix allows for linear time encoding using only shift registers. Besides, the decoder can be implemented with constrained complexity in several iterations. However, short cycles in the parity check matrix H introduce correlation of the extrinsic information during iterative decoding, and decrease the error correction performance. However, in Fossorier’s analysis [8], the performance of cyclic and quasi-cyclic codes in long length is limited due to the small girths. The difficulties of providing shift values in cyclic LDPC codes with large girths increase as the code length increases. Therefore, the non-cyclic structure is considerable to extend the girth of LDPC codes. Unfortunately, their code constructions do not adapt to the various code lengths and parallelized decoding scenario. This inflexibility may limit the emerging applications. As various multimedia services have numerous quality-of-service requirements and the wireless channels are time varying, the physical and link layer parameters in a dynamic communication scenario such as the length of a data frame, the code rate, and the block length need to be adapted with traffic characteristics and channel conditions. To provide an efficient design for emerging communication scenario, this paper introduces an efficient construction for large-girth LDPC codes to satisfy the parallelization in the high-throughput LDPC decoder.
2. ISSUE OF PARALLELIZED DECODER FOR LDPC CODES
Most of parallel decoding methods for LDPC codes adopted Min-Sum algorithm (MSA) [12] due to its simplicity and low complexity. In the partial parallel decoding procedure, to avoid memory collision, each processor should update check-to-variable messages stored in different memory space. Given that LDPC codes consisting of J×K blocks with block size L×L, where J and K are the column and row weights, respectively. After L access times, the decoder can update the check-to-variable messages by comparing variable-to-check messages in the K collocated columns of horizontal blocks simultaneously. However, these concurrent accesses to the same memory space may incur memory collision. An example of the parity-check matrix showing memory conflict is given in Fig.1. Two nonzero values (the entries in (7,1) and (7,8)) are collocated in the first and second block columns. It is noted that the check-to-variable messages are stored as compressed form. While updating the 7th check-to-variable message, the access conflict in the first and 8th variable-to-check messages would make the comparison (in the approximation of the sum of check-tovariable messages) incomplete in one clock. Intuitively, more decoding latencies are necessary [13] in the sequential design while more memory is unavailable. Therefore, in the code construction, the assignments of nonzero values in the collocated

978-1-4799-5341-7/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

425

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

rows of horizontal blocks must be different to avoid access conflict in the parallel processing.
Fig.1. Paradigm of memory conflicts in the parallel decoding
In high-rate applications, the decoding throughput is constrained by the high-complexity iteration in decoding variable nodes to achieve the required BER performance, although the MSA can simplify the LDPC decoder by the message approximation. More memory units are required to avoid execution latency incurred by operation in sequential. To achieve high-throughput system in the decoding, only the operations with independent memory access can be parallelized. In [5], the parallelization design still requires extra components such as Reverse Scheduling Units in the decoder to avoid access conflicts. Consequently, the modification in the code construction is useful to effectively solve memory collision-free in high-throughput decoding.
3. MATRIX REPRESENTATION The parity check matrix of LDPC codes discussed below consists of J×K blocks with block size L×L, where J and K are the column and row weights.
3.1. Block-wise expression for sparse matrix The LDPC decoding can be divided into individual tasks by
verifying the data independence in the iterative message update. In addition, several block-wise similarities are investigated to find the regularity, and this partition of the parity check matrix can be achieved in a manner similar to the construction for quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes. To facilitate the parallelization in the decoder, the matrix H consists of non-overlapping blocks which contain exactly one nonzero value in each row and column, so-called the regular sparseness. To obtain better error correction performance compared to the QC manner, the proposed scheme would assign the nonzero value more randomly. To rapidly update the check-tovariable message, the LDPC decoder uses K parallel processors to compute the check-to-variable message for all nonzero values in collocated rows of horizontal blocks. This parallelization without additional memory succeeds in all rows concurrently, and achieves the minimization of variable-to-check message in MSA. The first and second minimum variable-to-check messages q’s in a row can be extracted rapidly. Generally, the improvement of throughput is proportional to the number of non-overlapping blocks. The degree of speedup equals to the column row weight K.
Since the shifting block-wise structure may limit the performance of QC-LDPC codes, the random non-overlapping block structure is preferable in this study. Basically, we represent the parity-check matrix to assist the proposed code construction with large-girth and parallelized-decoding conditions. The expression corresponding to the parallel column process can be defined with two inspections. First, instead of cyclically shifting the identity submatrices to construct QC-LDPC codes, the nonzero values in the proposed matrix is noted to indicate the locations and the access orders of J×K×L nonzero values, simultaneously.

Second, the numbers of column and row are determined as multiples of L, and the parity check matrix can be partitioned into non-overlapping J×K blocks with size L×L. Consequently, the parallel column process in a massage-passing iteration can be completed in L operation clocks with respect to the sparseness. In message update of the LDPC decoding, the access time of each nonzero value can be determined as the horizontal location in its local block. In summary, the simplified matrix composed of the location information about the nonzero values is stored in the LDPC decoder to realize the parallelization. To access K messages from the variable nodes (in the set Vb\va) to the variable node va in the update process, the entry H(b,a) can be defined as the access order in the period L. Concurrently, the other J-1 update processes related to the variable nodes va can be accomplished in distinct J–1 memory space.

3.2. Row uniqueness in the simplified matrix To realize the parallelization in LDPC decoding without
additional memory requirement, the access conflict must be considered in the code construction. With respect to the regular sparseness discussed in Sec.3.1, an essential part in the proposed design is to ensure the number of an integer (a nonzero value in each block) appearing at most once in each row of the simplified matrix H. This constraint can satisfy the parallelization in the column process directly. This consideration can be formulated as H(b,a) ≠ H(b,a') where 1 ≤ b ≤ J×L and 1 ≤ a < a' ≤ K, and socalled the row uniqueness in the matrix H. Consequently, the construction of LDPC codes with this property can prevent different processors in the decoder access the same memory space concurrently, and the system throughput can be increased K times theoretically (or proportional to the block number in horizontal).

3.3. Cross-reference relation

Before detecting a cycle in the LDPC code construction, two

cross-reference relations are defined below.

Definition 1.

In the tanner graph, a cross-reference relation "va~cb~va'" is

defined, while two edges (va,cb) and (va',cb) exist in the Tanner

graph. According to the block-wise expression, a cross-reference

relation "cb~va~cb'" can be also defined for the edges (va,cb) and

(va,cb').

To realize the parallelized decoding, the block-wise

verification of memory conflict in each row of simplified matrix H

should be expressed for the cycle-free formulation.

Definition 2.

Based on this cross-reference relation, the access difference

between the access orders H(b,a1) and H(b,a2), where b ∈ {1, … ,

J×L}, a1 < a2 and ∀ai ∈ {1 , …, K}, can be expressed as

H a1 ,a2 b

=

H (b, a1) − H (b, a2 )

(1)

Note that the access difference should be nonzero based on the row

uniqueness defined in Sec.3.2.

3.4. Cycle-free formulation

In the simplified matrix H provided in Sec.3.1, a cycle with

length 2n can be expressed as a list of 2n distinct entries in

locations{(b1,a1),(b1,a2),(b2,a2),(b2,a3),(bn-1,an),(bn,an),(bn,a1)} with H(bi,ai+1)=H(bi+1,ai+1) for j=1, …, n−1 and H(bn,a1)= H(b1,a1). This relation in this list can be formulated as a linear inequality based

on the simplified matrix to check the possible cycle.

Proposition 1. Two equalities

H (b, ceiling(a / L)) = a mod L

(2)

H (b, ceiling(a' / L)) = a' mod L

(3)

426
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

hold in the simplified matrix H, if a cross-reference relation "va~cb~va'" exists in Tanner graph.

Proposition 2. The equality

H (b, ceiling (a / L)) = H (b', ceiling (a / L)) = a mod L (4)

holds in the simplified matrix H, if a cross-reference relation

"cb~va~cb'" exists in Tanner graph. Proposition 3. In the Tanner graph, a path passing

va1 , cb1 , va2 , cb2 ,, val , cbl exists, if vai ~ cbi ~ vai+1 and cbi ~ vai+1 ~ cbi+1 ’ exist for all integers in the interval [1,l-1]. By the Definition 1,

three equality functions can be derived from (2), (3) and (4) as

H (bi , ceiling (ai / L)) = ai mod L

(5)

H (bi , ceiling (ai+1 / L)) = ai+1 mod L

(6)

H (bi , ceiling (ai+1 / L)) = H (bi+1, ceiling (ai+1 / L)) = ai+1 mod L (7)

Proposition 4. Given n distinct variable nodes { va1 , va2 ,, van } and n distinct check nodes { cb1 , cb2 ,, cbn } in the Tanner graph. The simplified matrix H is determined by the method proposed in

Sec.3.1. If a cycle with length 2n consists of nodes

{ va1 , cb1 , va2 , cb2 ,, van , cbn } in order, then

H + H +  + H + H = 0 a1,a2 b1

a2 ,a3 b2

an−1 ,an bn−1

an ,a1 bn

(8)

Conversely, the cycle does not exist in this path, if Eq.(8) fails.

Thus the inequality is essential to prevent cycles while the sum of

access differences is nonzero for all possible paths. To construct

large-girth codes, all inequalities to check the cycle with length

less than g can be represented as the matrix product

PD = C = [c1c2 cr ]T where ci ≠ 0 for i = 1, 2, …, r (9)
where P is a cycle checking matrix with r rows and D is a vector

containing differences between all pairs of entries in each row of

the simplified matrix H. Each row in the checking matrix P

indicates a set of cross-reference relations in a cycle with length

less than g. This implies that there are at most (g−2)/2 access

differences in the cycle checking for the simplified matrix H

(consisting of J×L rows and K columns) with girth g. Therefore,

the row number of P and the size of vector D are

 (

g−2)/ i=2

2

L

×



J i



×



K i



and

L×J×K×(K−1)/2,

respectively.

Obviously,

the sizes of the checking matrix P and the vector D increase

dramatically, while J, K, L, and n increase. Instead of heuristic

trials, an effectual and efficient method is crucial to LDPC code

construction adapted for various lengths and parallel decoding. A

simple case is illustrated by applying the row uniqueness and

regular sparseness.

In [14], the solution set for (9) is a convex polyhedron (or a

cone), and the points which are not located on the cone can satisfy

the inequality constraints. Since the convex polyhedral set derived

from the simplified matrix for the code construction is not easily

found, a feasible and low-complexity construction based on the

Smith normal form is proposed in the next section.

4. EFFICIENT CODE CONSTRUCTION WITH MATRIX DECOMPOSITION
In the cycle-free inequalities (9), unknowns in the simplified matrix H would be solved in integers with the regular sparseness and row uniqueness. Therefore, the large-girth and paralleldecoding LDPC codes would be constructed. By decomposing the cycle checking matrix P into Smith normal form, the left inverse

matrix P' can be derived. Accordingly, the difference vector D can be a linear combination of column vectors in the matrix P' with respect to the integer solution.

4.1. Modified Smith normal form

Based on the discussion in Sec.3, the cycle checking matrix P

is an h×w matrix where h is the number of cycle-free inequalities

and w is the number of entries in D. Obviously, the rank r of the

matrix P is no more than w, because the row number of P is larger

(i.e., h > w). This implies that the rank of P is w (i.e., r = w).

If the left inverse P' is available and derived with the condition of

column independence, D can be expressed as the product P'C,

where C consists of nonzero entries. Therefore, the nonzero vector

D can be a linear combination of independent column vectors in

P', expressed as

D = k1P'(1) + k2P'( 2 ) +  + knP'(n)(mod L)

(10)

where ki is integer in the interval [0, L − 1] for i = 1,2,…,w.

Moreover, the column vectors of P' span the column space SP' to

solve the inequalities in (9). Consequently, an efficient

transformation of the matrix P can be achieved as

UPV = E

(11)

where Um×m and Vn×n are two unimodular matrices (square integer

matrices with determinant +1 or −1), and Eh×w is the Smith normal

form of P. In advance, this decomposition can be derived as

P' = VE'U

(12)

where E' is the left inverse of E. With respect to the integer matrix

D based on [14], we define B = εP' where ε is the factor for the

scale multiplication of P' to obtain an integer matrix B. Therefore,

Eq. (10) can be modified as

D = k1B(1) + k2B( 2 ) +  + kwB(w) (mod L)

(13)

where ki ∈ N for i = 1, 2,…, w and the column vectors B(1), B(2), …,

B(w) are linearly independent. Besides, the vector product

P'(Ti)B( j) = 0 holds for i ≠ j. That is, B(j) is parallel to the w–1

hyperplanes P(i)D = ki, where 1 ≤ i (≠ j) ≤ w. In other words, B(1),

B(2), …, B(w) are vectors which are parallel to the edges of the cone

in geometrical.

With B derived by scaling P' with the factor ε, the unknowns

(k1, k2,…, and kw) in (10) can be obtained by reducing the matrix E

with the Gaussian elimination as the solution of PD = C. It is noted

that only r = w can satisfy the cycle-free inequalities. Finally, the

cycle detection for the length at most g − 2 are completed.

4.2. Rank constraint for the simplified matrix In the matrix decomposition for Smith normal form, the rank r
of matrix E is under the constraint r ≤ min(h,w), where h and w respectively stand for the row number and column number of P. While the cycle-free inequalities (9) are constructed and corresponding matrix P is derived, we can transform P into the Smith normal form and calculate the rank r of the resulted matrix E. While r < w, w − r cycle-free inequalities could not hold and the Smith normal form doesn’t exist. This refers to the construction failure, and the entry re-assignment in the simplified matrix H is considered. Otherwise, E' and P' can be obtained. In our experiment, the refresh of the initial part of H is rare in the proposed method.

4.3. Construction of long-girth LDPC codes for parallel decoding
The proposed block-wise structure can provide the (J, K, L) LDPC codes with accessing K collocated columns and updating check-to-variable messages in parallel. Therefore, the

427
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

parallelization of LDPC decoding can be realized while the codes

are constructed with the block-wise structure. The initialization for

the code construction is to assign nonzero entries in the top K

blocks and left J blocks of the parity check matrix only with regard

to the regular sparseness in horizontal. Accordingly, no cycle

exists in this part. While designing the rest (J−1)×(K−1) blocks, an

augmented structure can be found by iteratively appending

regular-sparseness blocks and checking cycle to satisfy the

constraints of girth and parallelization. The code construction can

be illustrated in several steps.

• Step 1: The first block row and first block column without cycle

(in size g or less) can be constructed in initial.

• Step 2: The cycle checking matrix P is constructed after

appending a new block into the incomplete simplified matrix H.

• Step 3: If the rank verification (Sec.4.2) fails, go back to Step2

and generate a new block to complete the matrix H.

• Step 4: The left inverse matrix P' can be derived from the inverse

of the Smith normal form of P with two unimodular matrices. An

integer matrix can be obtained by scaling P' as B = εP'.

• Step 5: The matrix D can be the linear combination of column

vectors

of

B

with

the

factors

{k1,

k2,…,

kw}.

The

integers

{

H

i, k

j

}

are determined to satisfy the constraints of girth and

parallelization.

• Step 6: By the definition of access difference

( ) (

H ck , v j

( ) = H

ck , vi

−

H i, j k

),

the

unknown

entries

in

the

simplified matrix H corresponding to the padded block

simplified matrix H can be calculated.

• Step 7: Repeat Step 2~6 for rest blocks in the current block row.

• Step 8: Repeat Step 2~7 for the rest rows until the construction is

completed.

5. SIMULATION RESULTS In this section, we compare the performances of the proposed and random constructed QC-LDPC codes for parallelized decoding. Normalized min-sum algorithm with factor α = 0.75 is considered in the Addictive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. The experimental result in Fig.2 shows that the proposed LDPC codes outperform than random constructed QC-LDPC codes about 0.1 dB at BER (Bit error rate) 10-7, both with girth 12, length 4800, rate 0.5, and column weight J = 3. The QC-LDPC codes are consisted of identity matrix with different shift values. Note that the proposed codes are not constructed by cyclically shifting identity matrices. Besides, the proposed LDPC codes lower the error floor. To compare the efficiency of proposed method and random construction, “success rate” indicates the percentage of successful code construction with a desired girth and parallelized decoding. It is noted that success rate for both methods with short cycles is high; therefore, we demonstrate the advantage of proposed codes with g = 12. The success rate of constructing proposed code and random construction method are 7.85×10-4 and 2.73×10-5, respectively.

6. CONCLUSION Based on the decomposition of polyhedral formed by the cycle determination, we propose an efficient method to construct largegirth LDPC codes for parallel decoding. Therefore, the proposed code construction can be easily adapted for various code length and code rate. Besides, there is no performance loss compared to the randomly constructed codes, because the efficiency of message

passing introduced by the large-girth condition is considered. Simulation results over AWGN channels show that the proposed LDPC codes have better performance than that of randomly constructed QC-LDPC codes, thus providing codes suitable for practical applications. In summary, parallelized-decoding LDPC codes with large codeword length and large girth are constructed to avoid dramatical increase of the memory consumption and maintain BER performance in high-throughput coding systems.

10-1 Random QC

10-2

Proposed

10-3

Bit Error Rate

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

10-81

1.5

2

2.5

Eb/No(dB)

Fig.2. Performance comparison for parallelized LDPC codes and random QC-LDPC codes, both with girth 12, length 4800, rate 1/2, and column weight J = 3.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This paper was supported by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan. (MOST 104-2221-E-194 -028).

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Cambridge,” MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D.J.C MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.45, pp.399-431, Mar. 1999.
[3] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp.58-60, Feb. 2001.
[4] Z. Wang, Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasicyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. VLSI. Systems, vol. 15, no. 1, pp.104-114, Jan. 2007.
[5] Z.-F. Wang, Z.-Q. Cui, “A Memory Efficient Partially Parallel Decoder Architecture for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. VLSI. Systems, vol. 15, no 4, pp. 483-488, Apr. 2007.
[6] Haotian Zhang, José M.F. Moura, “The design of structured regular LDPC codes with large girth,” in Conf. IEEE GLOBECOM, pp.40224027, Dec. 2003.
[7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Irregular progressive edge growth (PEG) Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, pp. 480, Jul. 2002.
[8] M.P.C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation 8 matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp.1788-1793, Aug. 2004.
[9] J.-Y. Kang, Q. Huang, L. Zhang, B. Zhou, and S. Lin, “Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes: An Algebraic Construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 5, pp.1383-1396, May 2010.
[10] T.J. Richardson, “Error Floors of LDPC Codes,” in Proc. 41st Annual Allerton Conf. on Communications, Control and Computing, 2003.
[11] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, pp.2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[12] J. Chen and M.P.C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commum. Lett., vol. 6, pp.208–210, May 2002.
[13] A. Tarable, S. Benedetto, G. Montorsi, “Mapping interleaving laws to parallel Turbo and LDPC decoder architectures,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.50, pp.2002-2009, Sep. 2004.

428
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

