Incremental Decoding Schedules for Puncture-based Rate-compatible LDPC codes
Huang-Chang Lee∗and Yeong-Luh Ueng∗‡
∗Dept. of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.
‡Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Abstract—This paper shows that the decoding convergence
of the punctured low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can
be significantly increased using edge-wise scheduling belief-
propagation. If rate-compatible (RC)-LDPC codes constructed
based on puncturing are considered, the maximum mutual
information increase (M2I2)-based algorithm can be used to
arrange fixed schedules for incremental decoding, and further
reduce the required number of iterations. With the assistance
of the proposed decoding schedules, the puncture-based RC-
LDPC codes can be a potential solution for delay-sensitive HARQ
(Hybrid-Automatic Repeat reQuest) applications.
Index Terms— Belief propagation, messages-passing
schedule, error-control codes, low-density parity-check
(LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
For wireless communications, codes with different rates
are required in order to achieve efficient transmission over
time-varying channels. Rather than implementing numerous
dedicated codes with different rates, rate-compatible (RC)
codes [1]-[4] which can provide a variety of rates using
the same mother code, are attractive. The RC-LDPC codes
can be constructed based on the puncturing technique [5].
Although the convergence error-rate performance of punctured
low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can be compatible
to that of dedicated LDPC codes [6][7], the majority of
studies reported in the previous literature shows that, using
the conventional flooding (FL) or layered belief propagation
(LBP) schedules, the decoding convergence of punctured
LDPC codes is much slower than that of the dedicated codes
[5][8][9], and cannot be used in delay-sensitive applications.
One of the major causes of the slow convergence is that
when the belief propagation (BP) algorithm is applied to
punctured LDPC codes, many messages with zero values are
generated due to the punctured variable nodes. The genera-
tion and propagation of these zero-value messages degrades
the convergence speed of punctured LDPC codes. Following
the conventional FL schedules, the exchanges of zero-value
messages can be reduced if the punctured variable nodes can
be rapidly recovered. In [8], the k-step recoverable (k-SR) al-
gorithm is adopted in order to determine the puncture patterns.
According to the k-SR algorithm, a punctured variable node is
𝑘-step recoverable if it can be recovered in the 𝑘-th iteration.
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of
Taiwan under grants MOST 104-3115-E-007-003 and MOST 103-2221-E-
007-025-MY3.
Although the punctured variable nodes selected following
the k-SR algorithm can be quickly recovered, a satisfactory
convergence speed is still unachievable. In order to further
reduce the number of propagations of zero-value messages,
the sequential decoding schedules that match the puncture
patterns can be applied. However, following the conventional
node-wise update schedules, such as LBP [10] or shuffled [11]
algorithms, the propagation of zero-value messages cannot be
totally avoided. On the other hand, edge-wise update schedules
[12][14] can be arranged so that only the non-zero messages
are propagated, which can be more efficient than node-wise
update schedules for punctured LDPC decoding.
In this paper, the advantage of applying edge-wise update
schedules, including both the dynamic and fixed edge-wise
update schedules, to punctured LDPC codes are first explored.
It shows that both schedules can avoid the propagations of
zero-value messages, and hence the decoding convergence can
be significantly accelerated. This enables the punctured LDPC
codes to be a potential solution for the Hybrid-Automatic
Repeat reQuest (HARQ) applications. Since the arrangement
of dynamic schedules is unattractive due to its high complexity,
we focus on the fixed schedules for the RC-LDPC codes. For
reset decoding, the schedules can be arranged using the 𝑀2𝐼2-
based algorithm proposed in [14]. For HARQ applications,
the decoding convergence of each decoding attempts can also
be accelerated using incremental decoding [13]. In order to
further increase the throughput of delay sensitive applications,
the 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm are modified and used to arrange
schedules customized for incremental decoding. With the
assistance of the customized incremental schedules, a much
higher throughput can be achieved comparing to the decoding
results derived from the conventional FL or LBP schedules
when the number of iterations are limited.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
the benefit of applying edge-wise update schedules to punc-
tured LDPC codes is evaluated. The fixed decoding schedules
for incremental RC-LDPC decoding are arranged in Section
III, and the numerical results are presented in Section IV.
Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II. SCHEDULE ARRANGEMENTS FOR PUNCTURED LDPC
CODES
When the BP decoder based on the sum-product algorithm
(SPA) is applied to LDPC codes, the check node operation
978-1-5090-1698-3/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 1. An example of punctured LDPC code.
can be written as
𝑚𝑐𝑖→𝑣𝑗= 2 × atanh(
∏
𝑣𝑏∈𝒩(𝑐𝑖)∖𝑣𝑗
tanh(𝐿𝑣𝑏→𝑐𝑖
2
)),
(1)
where 𝑚𝑐𝑖→𝑣𝑗is the check to variable (C2V) message prop-
agated from check node 𝑐𝑖to variable node 𝑣𝑗. The variable
nodes neighboring to check node 𝑐𝑖except 𝑣𝑗are denoted
as 𝑣𝑏∈𝒩(𝑐𝑖) ∖𝑣𝑗, and 𝐿𝑣𝑏→𝑐𝑖is the variable to check
(V2C) message propagated from 𝑣𝑏to 𝑐𝑖. In the initial state
of decoding, the values of V2C messages from the punctured
variable nodes are zero. Then based on the check node
operation (1), if a check node is connected to more than one
punctured variable node, the C2V messages generated by the
check node will all be zero. Moreover, if the check node is
connected to one punctured variable node, then the check node
can only generate a single non-zero C2V message, which can
then be used to recover the punctured node.
Fig. 1 shows an example of an LDPC code with three
punctured variable nodes, where the nodes 𝑣2, 𝑣3 and 𝑣4 are
1-SR, 2-SR and 3-SR punctured variable nodes, respectively.
According to the k-SR algorithm, three iterations are required
before these punctured variable nodes are totally recovered,
and numerous zero-value messages will be generated and
propagated within these three iterations. These zero-value
messages provide no contribution to the decoding process, and
can be one of the major reasons why punctured LDPC codes
suffer from slow decoding convergence.
If the LBP schedule is applied to punctured LDPC codes,
the check node 𝑐2, 𝑐3 and 𝑐4 can sequentially be used to
recover all of the punctured variable nodes. However, when
𝑣2 is recovered by 𝑚𝑐2→𝑣2, two zero-value messages, 𝑚𝑐2→𝑣1
and 𝑚𝑐2→𝑣6 are also generated and propagated. Similarly,
when 𝑣3 and 𝑣4 are recovered, the generated C2V messages
will all be zero, except for the one transmitted to the punctured
variable node.
If the shuffled schedule [11] is used, when 𝑣2 is recov-
ered by 𝑚𝑐2→𝑣2, the zero-value message 𝑚𝑐3→𝑣2 is also
propagated. Then, when 𝑣2 is recovered, two of the three
updated C2V messages will be zero. Until 𝑣4 is recovered, the
generation of zero-value messages has been totally avoided.
It can be observed that neither the LBP nor the shuffled
schedule can recover the punctured variable nodes without
propagating zero-value messages. In other words, these two
widely-used node-wise update schedules are not efficient for
decoding punctured LDPC codes. Based on the previous
example, in most cases, when the punctured variable nodes are
recovered, only one of the updated C2V messages provides
meaningful non-zero information. Therefore, if a schedule
based on edge-wise updates can be arranged, and the C2V
messages that can recover the punctured variable nodes are
generated and propagated first, then the propagations for the
zero-value messages can be totally avoided.
The SVNF-RBP (silence-variable-node-free residual BP)
proposed in [12] arranges the update schedules dynamically
according to the C2V residual. Before the decoding process
is initiated, all C2V messages are set to zero. Then if the
SVNF-RBP is applied to the punctured LDPC codes, the
zero-value pre-computation messages associated with the zero-
value residuals will never be selected.
As shown in Fig. 2 (Step 1), in the initial state, there
are only four non-zero residuals, including 𝑚𝑐2→𝑣2 which
can be used to recover the 1-SR punctured variable node
𝑣2. The next updates must be one of these four messages
with non-zero residuals. Although it cannot be guaranteed
that 𝑚𝑐2→𝑣2 will be immediately selected by SVNF-RBP, the
propagations of other non-zero messages can still increase
the reliability of other un-punctured variable nodes. In other
words, even the punctured variable nodes may not be first
recovered, the convergence speed should be accelerated since
all the updates scheduled using SVNF-RBP are helpful to the
decoding process.
According to the previous example, it can be observed that
the propagations of zero-value messages cannot be avoided
using the conventional node-wise update schedules. In con-
trast, an edge-wise update schedule can be carefully devised
to propagate non-zero messages only. The C2V residual can
be a practical indicator for the selection of non-zero messages,
and then it can be expected that the SVNF-RBP can accelerate
the decoding convergence of the punctured LDPC codes.
In order to avoid the additional complexity derived from
dynamic scheduling, the fixed schedule that can accelerate
the convergence of punctured LDPC decoding is desired.
Since the zero-value messages cannot provide any increase in
mutual information, the fixed schedules S𝑝arranged using the
𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm proposed in [14] can also totally avoid
the propagations of zero-value messages during the decoding
process of punctured LDPC codes.
Fig. 3 shows the frame error rate (FER) versus the number
of iterations of punctured LDPC codes. The rate-3/4 and
rate-2/3 RC-LDPC codes are respectively obtained through
puncturing the length-2340, rate-1/2 LDPC code of the WiMax
standard [16]. When LBP, 𝑀2𝐼2-based schedules, and SVNF-
RBP are applied to these punctured codes, different conver-
gence speeds can be observed, as shown in Fig. 3, which shows
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
v2
v1
v4
v5
v6
c3
c4
v7
c5
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
residual = 0
residual ≠ 0
v3
c1
c2
v2
v1
v4
v5
v6
c3
c4
v7
c5
v3
c1
c2
v2
v1
v4
v5
v6
c3
c4
v7
c5
v3
c1
c2
Fig. 2. The decoding process when the SVNF-RBP schedule is applied.
0
5
10
15
x 10
4
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
Number of Updates
FER
LBP, R=3/4, Eb/N0=3.2dB
LBP, R=2/3, Eb/N0=2.75dB
M2I2, R=3/4,  Eb/N0=3.2dB
M2I2, R=2/3,  Eb/N0=2.75dB
SVNF-RBP, R=3/4,  Eb/N0=3.2dB
SVNF-RBP, R=2/3,  Eb/N0=2.75dB
Fig. 3.
The convergence speed of rate-2/3 and rate-3/4 punctured LDPC
codes using different decoding algorithms, where the mother code is the rate-
1/2, length-2304 WiMax code.
that by avoiding any propagations of zero-value messages, the
schedules arranged using 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm can signifi-
cantly accelerate the convergence for both punctured rate-3/4
and rate-2/3 RC-LDPC codes. If the dynamic schedule, i.e.,
SVNF-RBP, is adopted, the convergence speed can be further
improved.
III. FIXED INCREMENTAL DECODING SCHEDULES FOR
RC-LDPC CODES
Following the HARQ protocol, if the decoding for the
punctured LDPC codes fails, a new decoding attempt can be
initiated after the incremental redundancies, i.e., the originally
punctured parity-check bits, have been received. The most
straightforward scheme to process the new codeword is reset
decoding, where all messages from previous decoding attempts
are cleared.
For delay-sensitive applications, incremental decoding is
desired. Through incremental decoding, the messages from
previous decoding attempts are combined with the incremental
redundancies, thus the required number of iterations of the
new decoding attempt can be significantly reduced. On the
other hand, if the number of iterations is limited by delay
constraint, the throughput can be increased using incremental
decoding. Both the SVNF-RBP and the 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm
can be used to arrange the schedules that accelerate the
convergence of the punctured LDPC decoding. However, the
dynamic schedule is unattractive due to the high complexity,
the schedules for incremental decoding are arranged using the
𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm.
The original 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm is designed to arrange
the decoding schedules for the dedicated LDPC codes, the
initial values of the C2V mutual information 𝐼𝐸,𝐶and V2C
mutual information 𝐼𝐸,𝑉are set to zero. This setting matches
to the condition that the initial values of C2V and V2C
messages are also zero when a reset decoding is initiated. In
other words, when the RC-LDPC codes punctured from the
same mother code are used for HARQ application, and are
decoded using reset decoding, their decoding schedules can
be arranged using the original 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm.
Fig. 4 shows the convergence behavior of the cumulative
mutual information of an HARQ protocol using three reset
decoding attempts. In this example, the schedule 𝑆1 is first
arranged for the rate-𝑅1 code. If the rate-𝑅1 code can be
successfully decoded when the SNR is equal to 𝐸𝑠1/𝑁0,
the corresponding cumulative mutual information [15] can
successfully converge to ‘1’ when it is evaluated using the
SNR set to 𝐸𝑠1/𝑁0. Here the cumulative mutual information
of the rate-𝑅1 code is denoted as 𝐼𝑅1
𝐶𝑀𝐼, and 𝐸𝑆1 is the symbol
energy of BPSK modulation, where 𝐸𝑆1 = 𝐸𝑏1𝑅1.
If the rate-𝑅1 code cannot be successfully decoded when
the SNR is equal to 𝐸𝑠2/𝑁0, where 𝐸𝑠2
< 𝐸𝑠1, then
𝐼𝑅1
𝐶𝑀𝐼can only converge to a value less than ‘1’ at 𝐸𝑠2/𝑁0.
After combining the original rate-𝑅1 code with the additional
parity check bits, the rate-𝑅2 code is obtained, and can be
successfully decoded at 𝐸𝑠2/𝑁0. The schedule 𝑆𝑅𝑆𝑇2 can be
arranged for the rate-𝑅2 code. Before arranging the schedule,
the values of all mutual information, 𝐼𝐸,𝐶and 𝐼𝐸,𝑉, are
reset to zero. Since the decoding information obtained in the
previous decoding attempt is not retained for the next decoding
attempt, the behavior of the mutual information evaluation is
matched to the reset decoding.
If the SNR is lower than the decoding threshold of the
rate-𝑅2 code, the rate-𝑅3 code can be constructed after
more parity-check bits are received. Then the new decoding
attempt can be initiated using the schedule 𝑆𝑅𝑆𝑇3. In the
previous example, schedules 𝑆𝑅𝑆𝑇2 and 𝑆𝑅𝑆𝑇3 are both
arranged using mutual information with a zero initial value, in
other words, they are arranged under the assumption of reset
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1
R
CMI
I
1
R
CMI
I
2
R
CMI
I
1
R
CMI
I
2
R
CMI
I
3
R
CMI
I
1
0
S
E
N
2
0
S
E
N
3
0
S
E
N
Fig. 4. The convergence behavior of cumulative mutual information of three
successive reset decoding attempts.
decoding.
Fig. 5 shows the convergence behavior of the cumulative
mutual information of incremental decoding. The mutual in-
formation obtained from the previous decoding attempts can
be retained as the initial condition, and then be used to arrange
the schedules 𝑆𝐼𝑁𝐶2 and 𝑆𝐼𝑁𝐶3 for incremental decoding.
It can be expected that, by applying the incremental schedules
to the incremental decoding, the additional redundancies can
be more efficiently combined with the decoding messages
generated by the previous decoding attempts, and a higher
throughput can be achieved using the same number of itera-
tions.
The process of arranging the schedules for the two suc-
cessive incremental decoding processes is summarized in
Algorithm 1. Suppose that the mother code is a QC-LDPC
code constructed using the base matrix with 𝑀𝑝rows and
𝑁𝑝columns, where 𝑖, 𝑗are the index of row and column,
respectively. The parameter 𝑠is the index of the arranged
decoding schedules, and 𝑢𝑖,𝑗is the number of update of the
decoding messages corresponding to the circulant matrix of
the 𝑖-th row and the 𝑗-th column. Two compatible rate-𝑅1
and rate-𝑅2 punctured LDPC codes are punctured from the
mother code using the patterns P1 and P2, respectively, and
𝑅1 > 𝑅2. The length of the puncture patterns are equal to
𝑁𝑝, and the components of the patterns can only be ‘1’ or
‘0’. When P1(𝑗) = 0, then the variable nodes corresponding
to the 𝑗-th block columns of the mother code are punctured
for the rate-𝑅1 code. If these variable nodes are retransmitted
and form the compatible rate-𝑅2 code, then P2(𝑗) = 1.
As shown in both Figs. 4 and
5, the rate-𝑅1 punctured
LDPC code is first transmitted, but is not correctly decoded,
then the additional parity check bits are transmitted. These
1
R
CMI
I
1
R
CMI
I
2
R
CMI
I
1
R
CMI
I
2
R
CMI
I
3
R
CMI
I
1
0
S
E
N
2
0
S
E
N
3
0
S
E
N
Fig. 5. The convergence behavior of cumulative mutual information of three
successive incremental decoding attempts.
additional redundancies can be combined with the previously
transmitted rate-𝑅1 code, and a rate-𝑅2 punctured LDPC
code can be constructed for the second decoding attempt. The
decoding threshold of the rate-𝑅1 and the rate-𝑅2 punctured
LDPC codes are denoted as (𝐸𝑆1/𝑁0)0 and (𝐸𝑆2/𝑁0)0,
respectively, which can be evaluated using the PEXIT analysis
[15].
Since the schedule for the incremental decoding is arranged
for situation where the first decoding attempt fails, but the
second decoding attempt is successful. Therefore, in the initial
state for Algorithm 1, the value of the SNR 𝐸𝑆/𝑁0 will be
set to (𝐸𝑆2/𝑁0)0 < 𝐸𝑆/𝑁0 < (𝐸𝑆1/𝑁0)0. Using the function
𝐽(⋅) introduced in [15], the mutual information 𝐼𝑐ℎ(𝑗) can be
derived from the initial channel values of the variable nodes
corresponding to the 𝑗-th block columns.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
The rate-1/2 length-2304 WiMax code is selected as the
mother code, and the compatible rate-3/4 and rate-2/3 codes
are used to evaluate the benefit of the incremental schedule.
Suppose that the first decoding attempt for the rate-3/4 code
fails, additional parity check bits are transmitted and the
second decoding attempt can be applied to the rate-2/3 code. If
the information bits still cannot be successfully decoded, more
parity check bits will be transmitted, then the third decoding
attempt will be applied to the original rate-1/2 mother code.
Using the original 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm presented in [14],
individual schedules can be arranged for these three codes
with different rates. These schedules are determined under
the assumption of reset decoding, and can be referred to
as the ‘reset schedules’ S2/3
𝑅𝑆𝑇and S3/4
𝑅𝑆𝑇. Based on the
mutual information evaluated by the punctured rate-3/4 code,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Algorithm 1 Proposed M2I2-based schedule arrangement for
puncture-based RC-LDPC codes using incremental decoding
Initialize: if (P1(𝑗) = 0) 𝐼𝑐ℎ(𝑗) = 0;
else 𝐼𝑐ℎ(𝑗) = 𝐽
(√
8𝐸𝑠/𝑁0
)
for all 𝑗, where (𝐸𝑆2/𝑁0)0 <
𝐸𝑆/𝑁0 < (𝐸𝑆1/𝑁0)0.
Evaluate 𝐼𝐸,𝐶(𝑖, 𝑗), 𝐼𝐸,𝑉(𝑖, 𝑗) and 𝐼𝐶𝑀𝐼(𝑗) for all (𝑖, 𝑗)
using PEXIT analysis.
𝐼𝐶𝑀𝐼(𝑗) converge to 𝐼𝑅1
𝐶𝑀𝐼(𝑗), where 𝐼𝑅1
𝐶𝑀𝐼(𝑗) < 1.
if (P1(𝑗) = 0 and P2(𝑗) = 1) 𝐼𝑐ℎ(𝑗) = 𝐽
(√
8𝐸𝑠/𝑁0
)
.
1: 𝑠= 1, 𝑢𝑖,𝑗= 0
2: Apply the 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm of [14].
3: if 𝐼𝐶𝑀𝐼(𝑗) == 1 for all 𝑗= 1, ⋅⋅⋅, 𝑁𝑝
4: The sequence 𝑆𝐼𝑁𝐶is achieved for incremental decod-
ing.
5:
Terminate.
the ‘incremental schedule’ S2/3
𝐼𝑁𝐶can be arranged for the
incremental decoding of the rate-2/3 code. Similarly, S1/2
𝐼𝑁𝐶
can also be determined based on the decoding result for the
rate-2/3 code.
Fig. 6 shows the throughput that can be achieved using
LBP, fixed 𝑀2𝐼2-based schedules and dynamic SVNF-RBP
decoding schedules, where the number of iterations is 5. When
the number of available iterations is limited, the through-
put can be strongly affected by the convergence speed of
the decoding algorithms and combining schemes. Since the
throughput is closely related to the FER performance, then
based on the results shown in Fig. 3, the highest throughput
is indeed achieved using the SVNF-RBP schedule. The reset
decoding following LBP schedules provides poor throughput
performance. Using incremental decoding, the throughput can
be improved, but still cannot match that provided using the
reset decoding following the fixed schedules arranged using
the 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm. If Algorithm 1 is adopted to
arrange a fixed schedule for the incremental decoding, an
even higher throughput can be achieved with no increase in
complexity compared to that of LBP decoders.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the decoding performance of the punctured
LDPC codes have been significantly improved using schedul-
ing techniques. The propagations of zero-value messages can
be totally avoided using edge-wise update schedules arranged
using the 𝑀2𝐼2-based algorithm, which can also be used to
arrange the specific schedules for incremental decoding. With
the assistance of the proposed decoding schemes, a much
higher throughput can be achieved without increasing decod-
ing complexity, meaning that the punctured LDPC codes can
be considered as a potential candidate for HARQ applications.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Divsalar, S. Donlinar, C. R. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacity
approaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27,
no. 6, pp. 876888, Aug. 2009.
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
Es/N0
Throughput
SVNF−RBP, RST
M2I2, INC
M2I2, RST
LBP, INC
LBP, RST
Fig. 6. The WiMax N=2304 R=1/2 code is adopted as the mother code, and
the numbers of iterations are 5.
[2] T. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of rate-
compatible protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60,
no. 10, pp. 28412850, Oct. 2012.
[3] T. Nguyen and A. Nosratinia, “Rate-compatible short-length protograph
LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 948951, May
2013.
[4] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. Wesel, “Protograph-based
raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp.
15221532, May 2015.
[5] D. Klinc, J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible
punctured low-density parity-check codes for Ultra Wide Band systems,”
in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, St. Louis, U.S.A., Nov. 2005, pp. 3856-
3860.
[6] J. Ha and S. McLaughlin, “Optimal puncturing distributions for rate
compatible low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Inter. Symp. In-
form. Theory (ISIT), pp. 233, Jun. 2003.
[7] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-
density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no.
11, pp. 2824-2836, Nov. 2004.
[8] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible
punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,”
IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 52, pp. 728-738, Feb. 2006.
[9] E. Choi, S. Suh, and J. Kim, “Rate-compatible puncturing for low-
density parity-check codes with dual-diagonal parity structure,” in Proc.
IEEE Symp. Person. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC), Sep.
2005, vol. 4, pp. 2642-646.
[10] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikoli´c, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput
low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. 2001 Global
Conference on Communications, San Antonio, TX, pp. 3019-3024, Nov.
2001.
[11] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans.
on Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209-213, Feb. 2005.
[12] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, and W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed
dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans.
on Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886-896, Mar. 2013.
[13] Ketai Hu, Jeff Castura, and Yongyi Mao, “Performance-complexity
tradeoffs of Raptor codes over Gaussian channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 343-345, Apr. 2007.
[14] H.-C. Lee and Y.-L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster
convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 62,
no. 9, pp. 3104-3113, Sept. 2014.
[15] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT
analysis,” Proc. 2007 IEEE GlobeCom Conf., pp. 3250-3254, Nov. 2007.
[16] IEEE 802.16e WiMAX standard, IEEE P802.16e-2005, Oct. 2005.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:37:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
