874

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 5, MAY 2016

SC-LDPC Code With Nonuniform Degree Distribution Optimized by Using Genetic Algorithm
Yohei Koganei, Member, IEEE, Masanori Yofune, Member, IEEE, Cong Li, Takeshi Hoshida, Member, IEEE, and Yasuharu Amezawa

Abstract—We propose a class of spatially-coupled low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes consisting of a finite-length chain of component LDPC matrices which are assigned with different degree distributions, i.e., the strength of spatial coupling is nonuniform within an SC-LDPC code. For this class of codes, we use a modified density evolution algorithm to calculate the beliefpropagation (BP) threshold on the binary erasure channel (BEC). We then optimize the degree distributions by a genetic algorithm where the BP-threshold is considered as the fitness value. The resultant codes were confirmed to exhibit improved decoding performance compared with SC-LDPC codes having uniform degree distributions.
Index Terms—Spatially-coupled LDPC code, degree distribution, density evolution, BP threshold, genetic algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE structure of a spatially-coupled low-density paritycheck (SC-LDPC) code consists of a chain of LDPC blocks. In general, the chain is terminated in a finite length, which results in a stronger error correction capability at the both ends of the codeword. The coupling between adjacent component LDPC blocks propagates reliability information from the ends toward the center of the codeword, which exhibits a wavelike evolution of error correction through the iterative decoding process. It has been shown that SC-LDPC codes universally achieve capacity under belief propagation decoding [1] and can realize good waterfall performance and a satisfactorily low error-floor at the same time [2]. With such virtues property, SCLDPC code is attracting interest toward performance demanding applications such as optical communication systems [3], [4]. One of the major design issues of SC-LDPC code is related to the rate loss induced by the termination of the chain. Larger codeword length is beneficial for minimizing the rate loss, but this often leads to increased implementation complexity.
In this letter, we propose to vary the strength of spatial coupling within an SC-LDPC code to improve decoding performance with a limited codeword length. In other words, we
Manuscript received September 12, 2015; revised March 10, 2016; accepted March 13, 2016. Date of publication March 23, 2016; date of current version May 6, 2016. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was M. Baldi.
Y. Koganei is with the Memory Division, Toshiba Corp., Yokohama 2478585, Japan. He was with Optical Systems Business Division, Fujitsu Limited, Kawasaki 211-8588, Japan (e-mail: yohei.koganei.jp@ieee.org).
M. Yofune, C. Li, and Y. Amezawa are with the Technology Management Division, Mobile Techno Corp., Yokohama 220-0012, Japan (e-mail: yofune.masanori@jp.fujitsu.com; li.cong@jp.fujitsu.com; amezawa.yasu@ jp.fujitsu.com).
T. Hoshida is with Network Systems Laboratory, Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Kawasaki 211-8588, Japan (e-mail: hoshida@jp.fujitsu.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2016.2545652

assign each component LDPC block in a finite-length chain with different regular or irregular degree distribution. For the design of this class of codes, we modify density evolution algorithm over the binary erasure channel (BEC) and present the way to optimize the degree distributions by using a genetic algorithm. We then generate parity-check matrices conforming to the optimized degree distributions and evaluate their performance by numerical simulations.

II. STRUCTURE OF THE PARITY-CHECK MATRIX

We define the structure of the parity-check matrix of an SCLDPC code as illustrated in Fig. 1, Let using L and W that respectively denote the chain length of the spatial coupling and the coupling width among the component LDPC blocks. In the diagram, L corresponds to the number of columns of component blocks and W corresponds to the number of component blocks in each column. We consider the matrix size of each component block as (N − K ) × N , where K and N respectively correspond to the length of information bits and encoded bits for each component code. In this case, the design rate of the component code is K /N , and the rate of the SC-LDPC code is

r = L K − (W − 1)(N − K ) .

(1)

LN

The LDPC matrix for each component block, which is identified by (l, w) with l = 1, 2, . . . , L and w = 1, 2, . . . , W , can be either regular or irregular. The node degree distribution functions can be expressed as,

vlw(x) = vlw,1x + vlw,2x2 + · · · + vlw,i xi + · · · , (2) hlw(x) = hlw,1x + hlw,2x2 + · · · + hlw,i xi + · · · , (3)

where vlw,i is a fraction of columns having weight-i and hlw,i is a fraction of rows having weight-i in a component LDPC matrix
at (l, w), satisfying j vlw, j = 1 and j hlw, j = 1. Similarly, the edge degree distribution functions can be expressed as

λlw(x) = λlw,1 + λlw,2x + · · · + λlw,i xi−1 + · · · , (4) ρlw(x) = ρlw,1 + ρlw,2x + · · · + ρlw,i xi−1 + · · · , (5)

where λlw,i is a fraction of edges that are included in weighti columns and ρlw,i is a fraction of edges that are included in weight-i rows in a component LDPC matrix at (l, w), satisfying
j λlw, j = 1 and j ρlw, j = 1. The fraction of edges can be translated to the fraction of nodes by

vlw,i =

λlw,i / i , j λlw, j /j

hlw,i

=

ρlw,i / i . j ρlw, j /j

(6)

1558-2558 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:36:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOGANEI et al.: SC-LDPC CODE WITH NONUNIFORM DEGREE DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZED BY USING GENETIC ALGORITHM

875

TABLE I
COEFFICIENTS OF vlw (x ) OPTIMIZED BY THE GENETIC ALGORITHM FOR L = 10, W = 2, AND K /N = 1/2. (r = 0.45)

Fig. 1. Parity-check matrix of an SC-LDPC code.

TABLE II
COEFFICIENTS OF vlw (x ) OPTIMIZED BY THE GENETIC ALGORITHM FOR L = 10, W = 3, AND K /N = 1/2. (r = 0.4)

Fig. 2. Graphical representation of the parity-check matrix for W = 2 (top) and W = 3 (bottom). A circle (•) and a square ( ) describe a group of N bit nodes and a group of N − K check nodes, respectively. A connection between a circle and a square indicates that they are coupled by a corresponding component LDPC matrix.

The structure of the parity-check matrix illustrated in Fig. 1 for W = 2 and W = 3 can be described in a graphical representation as depicted in Fig. 2.

obtained for a given iteration number Imax with the limit of erasure probability plim by (9). εth, Imax , and plim satisfy the following relation:

III. OPTIMIZATION OF THE DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS A. Density Evolution on the BEC

ε < εth ⇔ p(Imax ) < plim .

(10)

By assuming the structure of Fig. 2, let us define pl(wI ) as the erasure probability of message from l-th bit node group to wth check node group in the I -th iteration, ql(wI ) as the erasure probability of message from w-th check node group to l-th bit
node group in the I -th iteration, and ε as the initial erasure probability so that as pl(w0) = ε. Then, the propagation of erasure probability in the check node process and in the bit node
process are given as follows:

ql(wI ) = 1 − ρlw 1 − pl(wI )

hl w

1

−

pl(

I) w

,

(7)

l =l

pl(wI ) = ελlw ql(wI −1)

vlw ql(wI −1) .

(8)

w =w

The average bit erasure probability in a codeword in the I -th iteration can be calculated as

p(I) = ε L
l

vlw ql(wI −1) .
w

(9)

We can track the evolution of erasure probability by using (7) and (8). The BP threshold on the BEC, εth, can be numerically

B. Optimization by the Genetic Algorithm
For irregular LDPC block codes, it is known to be effective
to use the genetic algorithm to optimize the degree distribution
[5]. We apply this technique for the SC-LDPC code to determine coefficients of vlw(x), hlw(x), λlw(x), and ρlw(x) for each (l, w), in order to maximize εth. We design hlw(x) to be a nearly regular distribution under a constraint K /N = const. With the relation of (6), vlw(x) remains to be the only independent degree distribution functions for the optimization. Further, we add a symmetric relation vlw(x) = vL−l+1,W −w+1(x) to reduce the degree of freedom. Then, we define a set of vlw(x) for all (l, w) as an individual and εth as the fitness value for the genetic algorithm.
As an example, we report the results of our trials for L = 10 and K /N = 1/2. This time, we restricted the degree of vlw(x) up to the fifth order of x and chose to set Imax = 100, plim = 10−15 to calculate εth. The results for W = 2 and 3 are shown in Table I and II, respectively. In Table I, it is evident that
the resultant coefficients obtained through the optimization are acutely different for each (l, w). The component LDPC matrices are regular with degree-1 for (l, w) = (1, 2), (10, 1) and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:36:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

876

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 5, MAY 2016

Fig. 3. The average bit degree along the chain of SC-LDPC codes for the optimized degree distributions in Tables I (W = 2) and II (W = 3).
Fig. 4. The BP threshold on the BEC versus the code rate with W = 3, K /N = 1/2 with various chain length L.

for wc = 6, respectively, where wc denotes the column wight or the bit node degree of the ensembles.
The third one has irregular degree distributions for their component LDPC matrices with vlw(x) = x + x2. This example is intended to represent the performance with uniform irregular distributions. The threshold of this ensemble falls into the middle of the above mentioned uniformly regular ensembles for L ≤ 10. This result may imply that vlw(x) of the uniformly irregular ensemble is a mere linear combination of the one for the two regular ensembles. On the other hand, it shows a better performance for L > 10, which might suggest the effectiveness of uniform irregularity for longer chain lengths of spatial coupling to approach capacity.
The fourth one is with non-uniform degree distributions where vlw(x) is generated by re-running the optimization algorithm for different L. Here, we restricted the maximum degree of vlw(x) up to 5 and set the iteration number Imax in (10) to 100 for L ≤ 14 and to 200 for L ≥ 20. Note that the optimization gets more time consuming and thus the result of L > 40 for this ensemble is not plotted in Fig. 4. It is obvious that the merit of this ensemble gets smaller with increasing L since the ensemble with uniform distributions gets close to capacity [8]. By contrast, we can see that the non-uniformity improves the BP threshold for shorter chain lengths of spatial coupling.

(5, 1), (6, 2); while they are irregular with higher degrees for the other (l, w)s. On the contrary, in Table II, the component LDPC matrices are uniformly regular with degree-1 around the center of the codeword (4 ≤ l ≤ 7), while being irregular with higher degrees around the ends of the codeword (l ≤ 3 and l ≥ 8).
To visualize the overall irregularity, we show the average bit degrees in w = 1, . . . , W for each l in Fig. 3. The difference between W = 2 and W = 3 may chiefly be ascribed to whether the bit degree can be 2 or not. For W = 2, the parity-check matrix is allowed to have weight-2 bit nodes so that the degree distributions could be optimized in a similar manner as an irregular LDPC block code [6]. For W = 3, on the other hand, there are no weight-2 bit nodes allowed, and thus the degree distributions are forced to be optimized relying on the spatial coupling effect. Forming a bathtub-like curve for W = 3 is thought to be useful in propagating more reliable information produced at the ends effectively toward the center of the codeword.
Because higher error floor is expected for W = 2 due to the existence of degree-2 bit nodes [7], we focus on the case of W = 3 in the following evaluations.
IV. EVALUATIONS
A. BP Threshold on the BEC
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the optimization for the BP threshold, we compare four types of ensembles with varying chain length L (Fig. 4). The first and the second types of ensembles have uniformly regular degree distributions for their component LDPC matrices with vlw(x) = x for wc = 3 and x2

B. Decoding Performance
To confirm the effectiveness of the optimization method, we generated parity-check matrices of SC-LDPC codes for the ensembles in Fig. 4. Here, we choose L = 10, K = 500, and N = 1000, so that the code lengths are 10 000 bits and the rates are 0.4. Each code is generated by applying the progressive edge growth (PEG) technique [9] with conforming to vlw(x) as x, x2, x + x2, and that of Table II.
The performance on the BEC is shown in Fig. 5 (Top) together with εth that is measured according to (10) for each code. It can be seen that the beginning of the waterfall region of each code matches well with the corresponding εth. Although the performance curve of the non-uniform SC-LDPC code seems to have inferior slope than the other codes, it still outperforms the regular and the uniform irregular SC-LDPC codes at least down to the bit error ratios above 10−4.
Figure 5 (Bottom) shows the decoding performance on the AWGN channel for the same codes. The behavior of each curve on the AWGN channel is similar to that on the BEC. This means that the improvement of the threshold by the optimization could be effective for AWGN channels, and it also suggests that it is possible to take advantage of the spatial coupling effect with moderate code lengths (∼10000 bits) by adopting non-uniformity for degree distributions.
Lastly, assuming more practical code design for optical communication systems, we compare decoding performance of an SC-LDPC code with non-uniform degree distributions (C1) to the strongly coupled SC-LDPC code (C2) and the weakly coupled one (C3) from [4] (Fig. 6). The code length of C1 is 32 640 bits such that the number of coded bits handled in the decoder of C1 corresponds approximately to those of C2 and C3. We

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:36:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KOGANEI et al.: SC-LDPC CODE WITH NONUNIFORM DEGREE DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZED BY USING GENETIC ALGORITHM

877

Fig. 6 that C1 achieves less required Eb/N0 compared with C2 and C3. We also see that the slope of the curve for C1 is less steep than those for C2 and C3, which would lead to a loss of relative performance merit of C1 for lower BER than 10−6. We expect it would be interesting to examine the effect of non-uniformity for the slope of performance curves for a future work.
V. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a class of SC-LDPC codes which have non-uniform degree distributions and have presented a method to optimize the degree distributions by applying the density evolution in conjunction with a genetic algorithm. The simulation results have shown that our design approach could be efficient to improve performance of SC-LDPC code with a limited code length.
Our approach of the optimization is also applicable to the spatially-coupled repeat-accumulate (SC-RA) codes [11] with some modifications to the algorithm of the density evolution. We believe further study for these codes could be promising toward a practical application of spatially coupled codes.

Fig. 5. The bit error ratio (dotted curves) and frame error ratio (solid curves) for SC-LDPC codes with L = 10, W = 3, K = 500, N = 1000 (r = 0.4, code length = 10 000 bits). Top: With erasure decoding on a BEC. A dashed vertical lines indicate the BP thresholds obtained by the density evolution with (10). Bottom: With sum-product decoding on a binary-input AWGN channel.
Fig. 6. Performance comparison for SC-LDPC codes with rate = 0.8. The performance curves for C2 and C3 respectively show the results of C3 and C4 in [4] for the medium window size operations.
employ layered decoding [10] and limit iterations up to 25 times so that the memory requirements of the decoders are nearly identical among the codes. The average bit node degree for C1 is about 4.3 as the result of our optimization. It is observed in

REFERENCES
[1] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[2] D. Costello, L. Dolecek, T. Fuja, J. Kliewer, D. Mitchell, and R. Smarandache, “Spatially coupled sparse codes on graphs: Theory and practice,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 168–176, Jul. 2014.
[3] A. G. i. Amat, C. Häger, F. Brännström, and E. Agrell, “Spatially-coupled codes for optical communications: State-of-the-art and open problems,” in Proc. 20th OptoElectron. Commun. Conf. (OECC), Jul. 2015, paper JThA.31.
[4] L. Schmalen, V. Aref, J. Cho, D. Suikat, D. Rösener, and A. Leven, “Spatially coupled soft-decision error correction for future lightwave systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1109–1116, Mar. 2015.
[5] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] S. J. Johnson, Iterative Error Correction: Turbo, Low-Density ParityCheck and Repeat-Accumulate Codes. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010, ch. 3.
[7] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[8] D. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. Costello, “New families of LDPC block codes formed by terminating irregular protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2010, pp. 824–828.
[9] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[10] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS’04), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[11] S. Johnson and G. Lechner, “Spatially coupled repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 373–376, Feb. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:36:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

