2016 5th International Conference on Modern Circuits and Systems Technologies (MOCAST)

Novel multi-Gbps bit-flipping decoders for punctured LDPC codes
Christina Archonta, Nikos Kanistras and Vassilis Paliouras Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Patras Rio Patras 26504, Greece

Abstract—Conventional bit-flipping (BF) algorithms spectacularly fail to handle punctured LDPC codes as they use hard decisions and, therefore, they cannot effectively cope with zero-reliability punctured symbols. However, BF techniques lead to low-cost high-speed decoders. This paper introduces a novel method that enables the use of BF-based iterative decoders for punctured LDPC codes. An erasure preprocessor is introduced and is shown to successfully mitigate the impact of puncturing, substantially improving the coding gain achieved for punctured codes under BF decoding. The proposed technique renders BF decoding of punctured codes useful, something that was not possible so far to our knowledge. Furthermore, two hardware architectures are introduced and evaluated. Hardware sharing is shown to efficiently exploit common structures in the proposed combined erasure and BF decoder, leading to a new architecture found to be particularly efficient. The proposed architecture requires extremely low hardware resources, facilitating full-parallel architectures that sustain multi-Gbps throughput rates when implemented on Virtex-7 FPGA devices.
Index Terms—Puncturing, bit-flipping, iterative decoders, FEC.
I. INTRODUCTION
Forward error correction (FEC) is an instrumental component of a digital communication system as it enhances the capability of the receiver to successfully retrieve data transmitted through a noisy communication channel. Quite popular among advanced FEC solutions are the Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, initially introduced by Gallager [1] and rediscovered several decades later by Mackay [2]. LDPC codes have already been adopted by many high-speed communication standards (e.g., WiFi, WiMax, DVBS2, 10GBASE-T). The decoding complexity of LDPC codes is an important challenge. Several authors have proposed techniques to efficiently exploit the excellent correction capabilities of LDPC codes. Many iterative algorithms have been developed for the efficient decoding of LDPC codes, either based on soft, hard, or hybrid decoding. Hard decoding algorithms are much less complex comparing to their soft-decision counterparts, achieving significantly higher throughputs and requiring remarkably less area, but at a cost of code gain loss. However due to low hardware requirements, they allow for the implementation of decoders for very long codes, potentially compensating some of the code gain loss.
Contemporary high-throughput communication systems demand rate adaptability aiming to the efficient use of the channel under various conditions. A complexity-efficient approach is to puncture a low-rate code, effectively increasing the code rate [3]. The punctured symbols are not transmitted, while the decoder is aware of their locations.
The simpler among the hard-decision decoding algorithms for LDPC codes, is the BF Gallager decoding algorithm [1]. Many variants of the BF decoder have been proposed, e.g., Weighted BF (WBF) [4], Modified-WBF (MWBF) [5], and Reliability Ratio based Weighted BF (RRWBF) algorithm [6], providing a range of trade-offs among throughput rate, complexity, and decoding performance.

Although puncturing provides high-speed and complexity-efficient rate adaptability, it introduces erasures to the received symbols. High-complexity soft iterative decoders based on log-SP and approximations, such as Min-Sum and variants, are able to efficiently handle erasures by mapping them to zero-reliability input symbols. However hard-decision decoders dramatically suffer from erasures and exhibit severe error floors since they inherently cannot handle reliability information. In order to address this fundamental weakness, preprocessing of the hard decisions is proposed here that improves the decoding performance of BF algorithms under puncturing. The preprocessing comprises an erasure decoding scheme, which when combined in a proposed way with a BF decoder, it induces a moderate hardware complexity. Specifically, it is found that the erasure decoder (ED) nodes practically include most of the hardware resources required to implement BF nodes; thus efficient sharing of resources becomes possible.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews basic concepts and details the impact of the use of ED in combination with decoders based on BF. Section III quantitatively discusses the proposed hardware architectures. Section IV concludes the paper.
II. BIT-FLIPPING DECODERS FOR PUNCTURED CODES
A binary LDPC code, like any block linear code, is fully described by its parity-check matrix H, which is binary and sparse. Each column of H corresponds to a codeword bit, while each row describes a parity-check constraint that every word must satisfy in order to be a codeword. An ace indexed at H(c, v) indicates that the vth bit participates to the cth parity check or equivalently that the cth parity check involves the vth bit. For convenience, we further define as Mj the ensemble of bits that participate to the jth parity-check equation.
1) The Gallager A/B decoding algorithms [1]: Assuming a C ×V LDPC code, the hard decisions yk, k = 1, . . . , N , directly derived from the received information are the input to the Gallager decoding algorithm, that comprises three steps, that follow the initialization of d0k to yk:
STEP 1: The decoder checks whether the parity-check constraints are met, i.e., if Sjl = 0, at the lth decoding iteration, for every check node, i.e., j = 1, . . . , C, where Sjl = ⊕i∈Mj dli−1, while ⊕ denotes the XOR operation. If all of the parity-check constraints are met or a predefined number of maximum decoding iterations Imax has been reached, the algorithm terminates.
STEP 2: A check-node estimation is made by each check node j for each one of the variable nodes k involved to it, k ∈ Mj , according to El (j, k) = ⊕i∈Mj\kdli, where j = 1, . . . , C.
STEP 3: For each variable node k, k = 1, . . . , N , all the check-node estimations that concern k, i.e., El (j, k), are considered together with the corresponding decoder decision at the previous iteration dlk−1. The number ∆k of the check-node estimations that

978-1-A4u6t7ho3r-iz9e6d8li0ce-n6s/e1d6u/$se3l1im.0ite0d©to2: 0Yo1n6seIiEUEnEiv. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:39:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2016 5th International Conference on Modern Circuits and Systems Technologies (MOCAST)

differ from dkl−1 determines the updated decoder decision dlk, in accordance with a predefined threshold δk. In particular, if ∆k > δk then dkl results by flipping dlk−1.
If δk is set to Dv(k) − 1, then it derives the Gallager A decoding algorithm, where Dv(k) is the degree of variable node k. Gallager B algorithm derives by setting δk to ⌊Dv(k)/2⌋.
2) The Erasure decoding algorithm: The receiver produces a
hard decision for each received symbol; however it introduces
erasures to the predefined locations of the punctured bits. Erasure
decoding exploits the parity-check constraints in order to resolve the
erasures. Erasure decoding, implemented in this paper, starts with the initialization of the decoder estimations d0k for every codeword bit, k = 1, . . . , N . The estimation is the hard decision yk derived from the channel information, except from the case of punctured bits where d0k is initialized to erasure e. The iterative procedure of erasure decoding is summarized as:
STEP 1: If at least one erasure exists among the decoder estimations dlk−1 and the maximum number of iterations has not been reached, then an ED iteration commence. Otherwise the procedure
terminates. STEP 2: At the lth iteration, the calculation of the check-node
estimations El (j, k) takes place, made by every check node (j = 1, . . . , C) for each one of the variable nodes that participate to it (k ∈ Mj). If there is only one erasure among the bits participating into the jth check-node constraint, then the check-node estimation for the erasure bit is set appropriately to satisfy even parity among
the remainder of the bits that participate to the check-node constraint. Otherwise El (j, k) is set to dkl−1.
STEP 3: The iteration continuous by resolving erasures among the decoder estimations dlk−1. For each dkl−1 = e the corresponding check-node estimations El (j, k) are considered. The decoder estimation dkl assumes the updated value of the majority of the nonerasure check-node estimations, remaining unchanged in case of a
tie. The decoder proceeds to the next iteration.
3) Decoding gain performance under puncturing: As mentioned
earlier, the decoding performance of the BF decoder substantially
degrades under puncturing as it cannot handle zero-reliability
symbols. The approach proposed here substantially improves
the decoding performance of the BF decoder under puncturing;
specifically it is proposed to provide the decisions produced by
the ED as input to the BF decoder. For modified BF decoding
algorithms that exploit the symbols’ reliability derived by the channel soft information, a predefined reliability R value is assigned to the erasures resolved by the ED. The value of R was determined here through simulations, while determination of the optimal R necessitates further investigation. The proposed preprocessing of the received hard decisions by an ED and the
subsequent processing of the output of the ED by a BF decoder,
significantly improves the decoding performance in comparison to a
stand-alone BF decoder, as depicted by the Monte-Carlo simulation
results, shown in Fig.1. Specifically various stand-alone BF-based
decoders have been considered, with and without puncturing, as
well as the proposed combined ED-BF scheme. The considered
decoders implement the decoding algorithms: Gallager A, Gallager
B, WBF, MWBF, RRWBF, and Normalized Min-Sum (NMS) [7]. A rate-0.84 (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code, of the IEEE 802.3an Standard [8], has been implemented. A Bit Error Rate (BER) vs.
noise curve is shown in Fig. 1. The curves in black correspond to
the BF decoders without puncturing, the blue curves correspond to BF decoders under puncturing of 30 codeword bits, while the curves in red correspond to the proposed combined ED-BF version of the

BER

0
10

−1
10

−2
10

−3
10

−4
10

uncoded

−5

10

Gallager B

Gallager A

−6

10

WBF

MWBF

−7
10

RRWBF

MP - NMS

−8
10

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Eb/N0

Fig. 1: BER performance of the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code.

decoders under the same puncturing scenario. Imax is set to 10 and 20, for the NMS and BF decoders respectively. The erasure decoder performs maximum two iterations, that seem to suffice for appropriately selected punctured bits. The positions of the punctured bits are selected in such a way that reduces the number of punctured bits per check node. The simulation results show that the BF decoding performance significantly degrades due to puncturing. By applying the erasure decoding preprocessing, a substantial compensation of this degradation is achieved, thus proving the effectiveness of the proposed decoding scheme.
III. PROPOSED HARDWARE ARCHITECTURES
Several combinations of an ED and a BF algorithm are possible. This work proposes architectures for a combination of the ED and the Gallager B algorithm, although every BF algorithm seems to benefit from the inclusion of an ED under puncturing. Two novel architectures are proposed, namely EDBF, and a Shared-Hardware EDBF (SHEDBF). The proposed EDBF architecture consists of a preprocessing ED followed by a BF decoder, as shown in Fig. 2. ED assigns one of three possible values, 0, 1, or e, to each incoming message. Thus, the codeword is mapped to a bit vector of twice its length to accommodate processing of two-bit values, since value 1 is assigned to the two-bit vector “01,” 0 to “00,” and e to “10.” Notice that the encoding chosen reduces the computational complexity of the majority of implemented nodes. When ED succeeds in resolving all erasures or the maximum number of erasure iterations is reached, the result enters the BF decoder. In the proposed fully-parallel architecture, every check node and every required variable node is instantiated onto hardware, exploiting both the very low hardware complexity of the nodes and the fact that every node has all the information needed available, at the same time. Finally, at the input and the output of the decoders, a Serial-In-Parallel-Out Register and a Parallel-In-Serial-Out Register, respectively are inserted to facilitate I/O in the evaluation FPGA-based board used for prototyping. Other I/O schemes can be used as well. All hardware components are designed using VHDL and implemented using Xilinx Vivado Synthesis Tool on the Virtex-7 family device xc7vx485tffg1157-1.
A. Erasure Decoder (ED)
As ED uses three values per bit position (0,1,e), the received word is represented as a vector of bits B = b2·V −1b2·V −2 . . . b0, where two consecutive bits b2·i+1b2·i correspond to one received symbol. First,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:39:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2016 5th International Conference on Modern Circuits and Systems Technologies (MOCAST)

codeword

Combined

decoded codeword

Common CN

2*V-1

2*V-1

V-1

V-1

31

31

30

30

29

29

28

27

26

25

24

I/O Register Erasure Decoder
BF Decoder
I/O Register

0

0

0

0

3

Fig. 2: Block diagram of the proposed architectures.

2 1

1

0

0

ED checks with a component for possible erasures in the codeword and if there is at least one, then the values of the variable nodes are sent to the check nodes in order to begin the iterative process (STEP 1 of ED in Section II). The messages are organized in vectors of bits and the network connections are defined by the position of aces in the parity check matrix of the LDPC code. When a check node spots a single erasure among all incoming messages, and since even parity must be satisfied, a return value different than e can be derived for a specific variable node. A tree of half adders and a tree of OR gates, with zero padding when necessary, are used in order to find if there is only one erasure among the messages that arrive at the node. The computation of the value that satisfies the even parity constraint per check is implemented with a tree of XOR gates (STEP 2 of ED in Section II). The outcome of every check node is assigned to a register.
The messages are returned to the variable nodes with a reciprocal network. Since the ED algorithm tries to resolve only the punctured bits, it is deduced that only the variable nodes assigned to these bits should be implemented onto hardware, leading to substantial complexity reduction over the complete ED. Thus, assuming that the maximum desired code rate after puncturing is 0.907, only 150 parallel variable nodes are implemented. For every node, the number of incoming aces and the number of erasures are counted by using two trees of half adders, one for the even positions of the incoming vector and one for the odd. The two numbers are compared and the value of the majority of the incoming becomes the decision of the variable node. In case of a tie or all the messages being erasures, then the state of the variable node remains erasure (STEP 3 of ED in Section II). Respectively, the results of every node are saved to registers.
B. Bit Flipping (BF)
The operation of the BF algorithm is found to resemble that of ED. Furthermore the network is the same with the exception that the messages communicated among the nodes are single bits instead of two-bit quantities. In order to implement the first step of BF in Section II, each check node contains a tree of XOR gates to derive a signal SAT, denoting whether it is satisfied or not. A tree of OR gates collects all Sj signals to derive whether all checks are satisfied or not. If decoding is needed, i.e, at least one check is not satisfied, then the iterative process starts with the operation of the check nodes (STEP 2 of BF in Section II). Every check node computes a reply message for every message received, based on the XOR result of every other message in the node. This operation is implemented by a tree of XOR gates and the decision for every message is a bitwise XOR between the result of the output of the tree and the value of the received message. Fig. 3 presents an example of a check-node architecture for the BF algorithm.Reply messages are returned to the variable nodes through the network and all the nodes, at the same time, determine the new value of the corresponding bit based on the value of the majority in a set of values which includes the previous value of the variable node and all incoming message values.

Fig. 3: Bit-Flipping check node architecture, of check degree 32.

7 6 5 4 3 2 10 00
Previous Value

Common VN
HA +
HA +
HA +
HA

Fig. 4: Bit-Flipping variable node architecture, of variable degree 6.

Part of a hardware unit implementing a variable node with variable degree six including zero padding is shown in Fig. 4. Resembling the ED variable node, it consists of a tree of half adders initialized by the result of the XOR of each message with the previous value of the bit (STEP 3 of BF in Section II). The result of the adder tree provides the number of messages that differ from the previous value of the node. The output of each node is stored in an assigned register.
C. Cascaded Architecture: EDBF
The proposed EDBF architecture is tested for the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code. The results show that high throughput and small device utilization are achieved. Both of the decoders perform an iteration in three clock cycles. In the first cycle the codeword update takes place, considering the decoder decisions at the previous iteration. For the case of the first iteration, the decoder input is considered instead. The second cycle comprises the check nodes operation, while the variable nodes operation takes place on the third cycle. For two maximum ED iterations and 20 maximum BF iterations, the minimum total throughput rate of the EDBF is 5 Gbps, whereas the maximum can reach up to 109.91 Gbps. At BER=10−5, the total throughput is 48.42 Gbps, corresponding to 2.27 average iterations, with a clock frequency of 161 MHz on a Virtex-7. Clearly, versatile multi-Gbps decoders are possible using the proposed technique.
D. Combined Architecture: Shared-Hardware EDBF (SHEDBF)
The two decoders utilize similar components and thus resource sharing can be used to minimize area. Instead of inserting an ED as preprocessor followed by the BF, a proposed combined decoder presented in dashed lines in Fig. 2, operates in two modes, i.e., as both an ED and a BF. The outcome is selected by a multiplexer according to a control signal.
The interconnection network between check and variable nodes in both ED and BF decoder is the same, but the length of each message in the ED decoder has twice the length of the BF message due to the need to represent erasures. Therefore the combined architecture fully exploits the two-bit interconnection network for the ED mode. When the mode is set to BF, the required single-bit messages are inserted in the even positions of the double-length vector.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:39:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2016 5th International Conference on Modern Circuits and Systems Technologies (MOCAST)

TABLE I: COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED DECODERS WITH PRIOR ART. §: Projected to 90 nm, †: Equivalent NAND gates

Algorithm Message bits Technology Parallel Factor
Area Area§ Gate Count Frequency Max Iterations(Imax ) Throughput@Imax Throughput@Imax §

[9] Layered OMS
4 90 nm partial 5.35 mm2 5.35 mm2 N/A 137 MHz
4 11.69 Gbps 11.69 Gbps

[10] MS 5 65 nm fully 4.84 mm2 9.28 mm2 N/A 195 MHz 11 36.3 Gbps 26.21 Gbps

[11] LCCBT-MBF
4 90 nm fully N/A N/A 1.22M 500 MHz
16 16 Gbps 16 Gbps

[12] NPMSA
4 90 nm fully 9.6 mm2 9.6 mm2 3.43M 199.6 MHz
9 45.42 Gbps 45.42 Gbps

EDBF
ED-BF 2
90 nm fully 5.39 mm2 5.39 mm2 813K† 500 MHz 22 15.52 Gbps 15.52 Gbps

SHEDBF
ED-BF 2
90 nm fully 4.46 mm2 4.46 mm2 809K† 500 MHz 22 15.52 Gbps 15.52 Gbps

TABLE II: LUT’s, FF’s Utilization and maximum frequency for the proposed architectures in a Virtex-7 device xc7vx485tffg1157-1.

LUTs FFs Frequency

EDBF 47037(15.49%) 41172(6.78%)
161 MHz

SHEDBF 44243(14.57%) 31796(5.24%)
167 MHz

The common hardware shared among the nodes is denoted in Figs. 3 and 4 as Common CN and Common V N respectively. The combined nodes can operate either as BF (mode=0) or as ED (mode=1) nodes. The result is to reduce the required BF-node hardware with a small hardware cost of multiplexers. The developed decoder attained 113.97 Gbps of peak total throughput when a single iteration is performed, while in the worst case, where the maximum number of 22 iterations is reached, the total throughput is 5.18 Gbps. At BER=10−5, the total throughput is 50.21 Gbps.
E. Comparison with other implementations
The two proposed architectures, including I/O circuitry, are compared with implemented decoders for the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code which is a common benchmark code for highly parallel LDPC decoder implementations. The results are summarized in Table I. The architectures are implemented with Synopsys IC Compiler using the cell library based on the UMC 90-nm process technology. Compared to the Layered OMS scheme in [9] which implements 64 check nodes and all the variable nodes, the proposed SHEDBF architecture requires about 1.2 times less area and achieves 1.3 times higher minimum throughput rate. The min-sum architecture in [10] achieves 55.4% throughput rate less than SHEDBF at BER=10−5, calculated according to the reported plots, and requires about 2.1 times more area. Compared to LCCBT-MBF [11], SHEDBF requires 1.51 times less gates but the minimum throughput rate is 3% lower. However, as shown in Section II, since [11] is a BF algorithm, it cannot handle puncturing, thus there would be a critical decoding gain loss. The normalized probabilistic min-sum decoder in [12] shows 1.47 times lower throughput rate at BER=10−5, while it requires more area compared to the SHEDBF; i.e., about 2.15 times more. Conclusively, the fully-parallel proposed architectures achieve high total throughput rate due to the small computational complexity. Furthermore, the required area of the proposed architectures is the minimum in comparison with other LDPC decoders. In addition the proposed architectures provide versatile code rate.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper we propose a novel combined ED-BF decoding scheme and corresponding hardware architectures that can

successfully handle punctured codes. The coding gain loss due to
puncturing is substantially mitigated, allowing the use of very simple
BF decoding under puncturing. The low complexity of BF decoder
allows the design of multi-Gbps (high-throughput) systems, while
the rate-adaptability that puncturing offers, attaches the flexibility
required by modern communication systems. A proposed combined
architecture exploits the structural similarity between the erasure and
the BF decoder, achieving low area utilization. The low coding gain
of the BF decoder can be mitigated by the use of higher-length codes.
The substantial coding gain improvement combined with multi-Gbps
rates and low complexity render the proposed decoders interesting
candidates for multi-Gbps systems requiring code rate versatility.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[2] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399– 431, Mar 1999.
[3] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 36, pp. 389–400, Apr 1988.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-Density Parity-Check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov 2001.
[5] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “A modified weighted Bit-Flipping decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, pp. 165–167, March 2004.
[6] C.-H. Lee and W. Wolf, “Implementation-efficient Reliability Ratio Based Weighted Bit-Flipping decoding for LDPC codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 41, pp. 755–757, June 2005.
[7] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of Low-Density Parity Check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[8] IEEE Std 802.3an-2006 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.3-2005), pp. 1– 167, 2006.
[9] A. Cevrero, Y. Leblebici, P. Ienne, and A. Burg, “A 5.35 mm2 10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC decoder chip in 90 nm CMOS,” in Solid State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC), 2010 IEEE Asian, pp. 1–4, Nov 2010.
[10] T. Mohsenin, D. N. Truong, and B. M. Baas, “A Low-Complexity Message-Passing Algorithm for Reduced Routing Congestion in LDPC Decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 57, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[11] J.-H. Hung and S.-G. Chen, “A 16Gbps Real-Time BF-based LDPC Decoder for IEEE 802.3an Standard,” in International Conference on Multimedia and Signal Processing (CMSP), vol. 1, pp. 63–67, May 2011.
[12] C. C. Cheng, J. D. Yang, H. C. Lee, C. H. Yang, and Y. L. Ueng, “A Fully Parallel LDPC Decoder Architecture Using Probabilistic MinSum Algorithm for High-Throughput Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 61, pp. 2738–2746, Sept 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:39:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

