Research on LDPC Code Decoding Algorithm Based on Scheduling Strategy

Feng Xiao
Liaoning provincial radio and television transmission center, Shenyang 110016, China E-mail: 46022850@qq.com
Abstract: With the rapid development of the channel coding technology, low density parity check(LDPC) code has been widely concerned by researchers all of the world as an approaching code to Shannon limit. Error floor is an important issue in the theory of LDPC codes and the research of iterative decoding algorithms. Based on the decoding of LDPC codes, a new improved decoding algorithm, Group Belief Propagation (GBP) based on variable nodes is proposed for the different scheduling strategies of the LDPC codes. According to the difference between the messages and the hard decision values, the variable nodes are divided into reliable nodes and unreliable nodes. And the unreliable nodes are priority to update. Further, the effect of threshold for judging the group on GBP strategy is analyzed. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm can achieve better convergence and decoding performances compared to three classical scheduling algorithms. Meanwhile, it can overcome the error floor phenomenon caused by the trapping set effectively. Key words: LDCP; error floor; scheduling; trap set.

1 Introduction
The concept of low density parity check codes was first discovered by Gallager in his PhD thesis in 1962. Mackay and Spielman and other scholars pay attention to it in the 1990s, and then caused the people's extensive concern[1].The performance of LDPC codes is excellent, but it has error floor in the area of high signal to noise ratio. The error floor is caused by trap sets in the Tanner chart of LDPC code. In the actual application of data storage and optical communication system, it is required to be very low error floor[2]. Therefore, how to effectively reduce the error floor of LDPC code is very important in practical application.
At present, there are two aspects of the improvements in the low error floor LDPC decoding algorithm. The first is trap set relevant improvement methods, such as trap concentration method, table find method, bi-mode and bit-pinning decoder; the second is the improved method without trap sets, such as two stage decoding algorithm, the average decoding algorithm, offset decoding algorithm and so on[3].However, the improved message propagation decoding algorithm is based on the flooding (parallel) scheduling strategy, which generally has a slow convergence speed and can’t overcome the trap set.
Group Belief Propagation (GBP) is proposed to overcome the trap sets. In this algorithm, the variable nodes are judged according to whether they are satisfied or not, and then the nodes are divided into reliable and unreliable nodes. Then the two groups of nodes are decoded by different strategies.
The content of the paper is organized as follows: in the next section, an overview of LDPC codes is discussed; in the third section, different scheduling strategies of four mainstream LDPC codes decoding algorithm are analyzed in detail; in the fourth section, the improved GBP algorithm is proposed based on the
This work is supported by National Nature Science Foundation under Grant 61201054.

four mainstream scheduling algorithm. Then the algorithm analysis and process are provided; and the simulation experiments and results analysis are presented; in the final, the conclusion is given.

2 LDPC Code Overview
The parity check matrix of LDPC codes is composed of a large number of "0" element and a small amount of "1" element. Because of the sparsity of the parity check matrix, LDPC codes are called low density parity check codes[4].LDPC code is a linear block code, Gallager first proposed the concept of regular LDPC code, the following details of the regular LDPC code to meet the conditions of the check matrix are given:
(1)The number of “1”in each row is ρ in H ;
(2)The number of “1”in each column
is λ in H , λ  3;
(3)Compared to code length and the number of
rows of the matrixˈ ρ and λ are very small.
Fig.1 shows a (6,2,3) short code LDPC code of the check matrix and its corresponding calibration equations.

ª1 1 1 0 0 0º ««0 1 1 1 0 0»» «1 0 0 0 1 1» ¬«0 0 0 1 1 1»¼

­x1 + x2 + x3 = 0

®°° °

x2 x1

+ +

x3 x5

+ +

x4 x6

= =

0 0

°¯x4 + x5 + x6 = 0

Fig.1 Check matrix and check equations
LDPC code can not only be used to verify the calibration matrix, but also to be able to use the Tanner diagram to express. Tanner diagram of the LDPC code and the calibration matrix has one corresponding relationship. In the Tanner graph, the variable node is replaced by circles, it said a bit in the code word; check node using the box to replace, which represents a parity

978-1-4673-9714-8/16/$31.00 c 2016 IEEE

3816

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

check equations, as shown in Fig.2, the (6,2,3) regular LDPC codes Tanner graph is given.

c1

c2

c3

c4

v1

v2

v3

v4

v5

v6

Fig.2 (6,2,3) Tanner structure of regular LDPC code

Irregular LDPC code refers to the number of 1 in

parity check matrix of rows (or columns) is not exactly

the same. Practice shows that the performance of the

irregular LDPC codes is better than the regular LDPC

codes[5]. The irregular LDPC codes are usually

described by the degree distribution, as shown in

formula (1):

( ) ¦ ( ) ¦ λ x =

λ x , dv

i −1

i=2 i

ρx =

ρ dc
j=2

x j−1
j

(1)

And the degree distribution satisfies:

¦ ¦ ( ) ( ) λ 1 =

λ dv
i=2 i

= 1,

ρ1 =

ρ dc
j=2 j

=1

(2)

Among them, λ(x) and ρ(x) represent the

degree distribution of variable nodes and the check

nodes respectively, dv and dc represent the maximum number of variable nodes and check nodes. λi

represents the probability that the total variable number
of edges connected to all the nodes that degree is i , ρ j

represents the probability that the total check number of
edges connected to all the nodes that degree is j .

3 Decoding algorithm based on different scheduling strategies
At present, the message propagation algorithm of LDPC codes is mainly decoding algorithm based on parallel mechanism (also known as flooding mechanism). However, parallel mechanism is not optimal, serial decoding strategy will accelerate convergence decoding in a certain extent.

3.1 Flooding mechanism
The belief propagation algorithm (BP) is the most common algorithm for LDPC decoding. BP algorithm is usually implemented in the logarithmic domain, which can reduce the multiplication operation. The ratio log-likelihood( LLR) is used to represent the message of

the nodes on the Tanner graph[6]. LLR's polarity

symbol values indicate the possibility of a variable node

with 0 or 1, and the absolute value of LLR shows the

reliability of the message. The formula (3) indicates that

information from the channel of variable nodes is

represented by a likelihood ratio.

(( )) C j

= log¨©§¨

p p

yj |vj yj |vj

=0 =1

¸¹·¸

(3)

For any connected ci and v j in the Tanner
diagram, the message propagation process of variable nodes to check nodes is shown as formula (4):

¦ m = m + C v j →ci

( ) ca →v j
ca∈N v j \ci

j

(4)

Message of check nodes to variable nodes is

as following:

∏ ( ) mci →vj

= 2 × tanh§¨¨© vb∈N (ci )\v j

tanh

mvb →ci 2

¸· ¹¸

(5)

After the end of each round of iteration, a hard decision is made according to formula (6):

( ) ¦ ˄L 1v.1j ˅= ca∈N (v j ) mca→vj + C j (6)
Until the maximum number of iterations is reached˄, o1r .t2h˅e end of the iteration is satisfied, the end of the decoding is finished.
Fig.3 is the node message propagation process for the parallel BP algorithm.

c1

c2

c3

c4

v1

v2

v3

v4

v5

Fig. 3 The message propagation of flooding algorithm
In the figure, the first time to update all mv→c , and then update the whole mc→v part. Corresponding to the
matrix, the essence is that first update all the check nodes by line, and then update all the information nodes by column.
3.2 Serial mechanism

2016 28th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3817

The convergence rate of the serial scheduling can be improved one time than the parallel mechanism. LBP (Layered BP) is used to analyze the serial scheduling algorithm, and LBP is a kind of algorithm which is used to verify the algorithm. In an iterative process, the completion of the check node and variable node update is by step, as shown in Fig.4 for the LBP node message propagation process sample.

c1

c2

" c3

cM

step one

step t

"

v1

v2

v3

vN

Fig. 4 The message propagation of LBP

3.3 Serial dynamic message updating mechanism
Residual BP belief propagation algorithm (RBP) belongs to dynamic message scheduling strategy. It is based on a sequence that according to the residual size, and the nodes with the largest residual are priority updated [7].
The message propagation of the RBP node is shown in Fig.5. The bold edge has the maximum residual value.

c1

c2

" cM

step

step

"

v1

v2

v3

vN

Fig. 5 The message propagation of RBP

In order to obtain good decoding performance when the number of iteration is increased, a new algorithm is proposed to overcome the greed of the RBP

algorithm. It is called Node-Wise RBP(NW-RBP)[8], which is based on the selected check node ci .
NW-RBP node message propagation process is shown in Fig.6.

c1

" c2

cM

step

step

"

v1

v2

v3

vN

Fig. 6 The message propagation of NW-RBP

4 Group belief propagation algorithm
In this paper, A Group Belief Propagation (GBP) is proposed to overcome the trap sets. The variable nodes are judged according to whether they are satisfied or not, and the nodes are divided into reliable and unreliable nodes. Then the two groups of nodes are decoded by different strategies.
4.1 GBP scheduling strategy
The group belief propagation algorithm first group the variable nodes, and then decoding. The detailed mechanism is described as follows. First, the nodes are divided into two groups. The first group is called reliable nodes, and the nodes are defined as the nodes of the external decision symbols, as shown in Figure 7 (a). We set the node's final judgement symbol "+". Each edge node information transmitted message symbol is "+". It is judged that the information node is reliable node; the second group called unreliable nodes, we define external symbol inconsistent nodes is not reliable information node, as shown in Figure 7 (b).Considering the unreliable information nodes are more likely to have a greater probability of error, we first update this type of information nodes, so that they receive more external information from the check node.

++ +

++

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7 Node classification of GBP

After determining the update priority of different groups, a message iterative update process is conducted for two groups of information nodes. We define the message that variable node accepted along the edge
from information nodes is mc→v as follows:

3818

2016 28th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

( ) ( ) αij = mci →vj − L v j , ci ∈ N v j

(7)

( ) In the formula, L v j and v j express a hard

decision that is made in the current iteration, that is, the

sum of the messages transmitted by the channel

message and the neighbor node.

Formula (8) expresses the difference between a

message ci give to v j and a hard decision v j .

Because the updating of variable node addition

operation, it can be expressed as follows:
( ) ( ) αij = sum mci′→v j , N v j \ ci (8)

For variable node v j , calculating all αij ,the

greater the message and the hard decision values are. It

is considered that the effect of the check node to the

variable node is the weakest, so it should be collected

more information to update the variable nodes by the

check node.

As shown in Fig.8, for unreliable variable nodes
( ) v j , if (a, j) = arg max αij , the next step ca should

be selected. More information on ca is collected to

update v j .

By RBP and NW-RBP inspired for a check node is

connected to all the variable nodes are updated

simultaneously, which makes them have more of the

low reliability of the variable node involved in the

update. NW-RBP algorithm make it more effectively

and overcomes the trap set errors caused by the platform

phenomenon [9].

In Fig.8, we suppose all the variable nodes that

connect with ca are low reliability, like v j and v j′ .So we

have to update all the neighbor nodes from ca .

ca

cb

cc

v v Fig. 8

j Messages

propagation

of

unrej′liable

variable

node

GBP algorithm is a kind of dynamic message updating strategy, the processing procedure of the unreliable variable nodes is as follows:
By traversing all the nodes to find all the check nodes connected to each node. As shown in Fig.9,

assuming(3th.1a)t the gray variable node v1 is not a reliable node, then the node associated with it is c1 .
(1) In the neighbor check node of the node of these
{ } variables, the check node with the maximum αij value
is selected. In Fig.9, for unreliable variable node v1 , if
maximum αij is for the message c1 to v1 , then c1 is
checked.
(2) Message update processing. Fig.9 with solid
line arrows, the first step updating mc1→v1 and mc1→v4 at
the same time, and the corresponding boundary value is
{ } 0. But in fact, when we determine αij , it has been
known the value of mc1→v1 and mc1→v4 , which means
that these two values do not need to be re calculated.
The second step, the variable node v1 and v4 update the other check nodes in addition to c1 , shown as dotted
arrows. The third step, in order to be able to
{ } update αij , we should update variable node from
check nodes, as the solid arrow.

c1

c2

c3

step step step

v1

v2

v3

v4

v5

Fig. 9 Message propagation of GBP

4.2 The detailed steps of the improved algorithm and the algorithm flow
The GBP algorithm is described as follows:
(1)First, for any unreliable node vj ,
find (i, j) = argmaxα .
(2)For any variable node v j′ ∈ N (ci ) , the check
( ) node ck ∈ N v j′ \ ci , the message from the variable
node to the check node is mv j′ →ck
(3)Setα ij′ = 0 .

2016 28th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3819

( ) (4)For any check node va ∈N ck \ vj′ , the
message from the check node to variable node is
mck →va .
(5)Calculate αka .
(6) Until all the variable nodes are traversed, and an iteration is end.
5 Simulation results and analysis

5.1 Complexity analysis
In the each iteration process of RBP, it is needed to calculate the residual value before and after the process, and then sort the algorithm, thus increasing the complexity of the algorithm. NW-RBP contrast RBP has more redundancy calculation, many of the information will be repeated calculation and become no use of information[10].GBP algorithm is inspired by LBP, and the NW-RBP. On unreliable node variable group process, similar to the NW-RBP, the difference is that, GBP on this part of the variable node update is one by one, when traversed all unreliable variable nodes, unreliable processing is completed. In addition, the GBP does not need to be done before and after two times of the residual value calculation, it is only through the current pass of the message to determine which variable node is not reliable.GBP inherits the advantages of NW-RBP, and updates the number of variables that are constrained by the same verification equation, so it can effectively overcome the error platform caused by the trap set.
Table 1 gives the number of operations of different scheduling algorithms in the process of an iteration. For ease of analysis, the average number of the check nodes and variable nodes are dc and dv , and the number of edges in Tanner is e . Here ε indicates that the number of variable nodes in the iteration process.

Tab.1 Edges calculation of different algorithms in per iteration

Flooding LBP RBP

Residual calculation times
0 0
e

GBP

0

Update edge number
2e 2e e*(dv −1)*(dc −1)
εN∗dv ∗(dv −1) ∗(dc −1) + (1−ε)N∗(dv −1) ∗(dc −1)

As shown in table 1, although the LDPC code and the GBP code for most of the long code length, but the four algorithms in an iterative process of the need to update the number of edges often GBP>RBP>LBP>flooding. Also in the residual value calculation, RBP requires storage on an all news value,

and in a new round of updates need to sort messages a residual, and GBP traversal processing each unreliable variable node needs only to a value for sorting. In RBP, maximum residual value edge is updated firstly, when all edges have been selected, the iteration is end. However, GBP is according to the variable nodes determine the corresponding check node update the news, when all the variable nodes to be traversed before treated, an iterative decoding is end.
5.2 Simulation results The PEG method is used to construct the irregular
LDPC code, and the decoding algorithm is performed under the Gauss white noise channel.
Fig.10 shows the performance curves of the different decoding algorithms and the different Eb / N0 with the maximum number of iterations is 10 times and codes is (256128).
Fig. 10 Performance of (256, 128) with maximum iteration times equal to 10
In the figure, the squares represent the flooding mechanism of decoding algorithm performance curve, the five pointed star represents the serial mechanism of LBP performance curve and performance curve of the triangle represents the RBP algorithm and improved the asterisk represents the dynamic strategy of GBP algorithm performance curve. The decoding performance of (128,256)LDPC is improved with the increase of the Eb / N0 , the serial mechanism is superior to the parallel mechanism, and the dynamic message scheduling strategy is better than the non dynamic message updating strategy. And the performance of the improved GBP algorithm is the best.
Before Eb / N0 =2.0dB, because the wrong platform did not appear with low signal to noise ratio, the advantage of GBP is not shown. With the increase of the SNR, the channel environment is good, the GBP algorithm can jump out of the trap set, and the advantage is beginning to show. When Eb / N0 =3.0dB, compared with the other three algorithms flooding,

3820

2016 28th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LBP and RBP, GBP have 1dB, 0.4 dB and 0.2 dB decoding gain.
Fig.11 shows the performance curves of the four different algorithms with the maximum number of iterations is 10 times and codes length is (512,256).
As can be seen, when the code length is longer, the GBP decoding performance is better than the other three algorithms.
In the performance curve of (512,256) codes, we note that the GBP algorithm is not outstanding in low SNR. With the increase of SNR, error platform is
displayed in RBP. When Eb / N0 =2.3dB, the
performance of RBP is not as good as GBP, the main reason is that the RBP's greed; And GBP shows superior performance compared with flooding, LBP and RBP, GBP respectively 0.5 dB and 0.4 dB and 0.1 dB coding gain. This is mainly because the GBP can overcome the trap set errors caused by the platform phenomenon.

rediscovery and new results[J], 2001,47(7):2711-2736.
[3]J inghu Chen, M.Fossorier. Near optimum university belief propagation based Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes[J], IEEE Trans Commun, March 2002, 406-414.
[4]Jinghu Chen, M.Fossorier. Density evolution for BP-cased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes and their quantized versions[J], IEEE Commun Lett,2002, 6(5):8-10.
[5]Cai Lizi.LDPC decoding scheduling algorithm research [D], Beijing, Beijing Jiaotong University,2014.
[6]Yu Cheng He etal. Fast Decoding of LDPC using Quantization[J], Electronics Lette, 2002, 48(4):214-128.
[7]M. M. Mansour, N. R. Shanbhag, High-throughput LDPC decoders[J], IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 2003, 11(2):976–996.
[8]Zhang Song, Ma Linhua. Improved LDPC codes based on integer arithmetic[J],system engineering and electronic technology,35, 2013 (3):638-642.
[9]An Qi, Zhang Xiaolin. Improved dynamic scheduling algorithm for LDPC code based on sub iteration number [J], TV technology, 2014,38 (1): 124-127.
[10]Balatsoukas . A Paralleled Layered QC-LDPC Decoder for IEEE[C],2013.

Fig. 11 Performance of (512, 256) with maximum iteration times equal to 10
6 Conclusions
This paper first introduces the basic concept of LDPC code and Tanner diagram, and then introduced the main algorithm based on different scheduling strategies, namely LLR, LBP, RBP and NW-RBP algorithm. Based on the analysis and comparison of these four algorithms, GBP algorithm is proposed in this paper. In this algorithm, the variable nodes are judged according to whether they are satisfied or not, and then the nodes are divided into reliable and unreliable nodes. Then the two groups of nodes are decoded by different strategies. This algorithm can effectively overcome the trap set and reduce the error level.
Reference
[1] T.J.Riehardson and R.L.Urbanke. Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes[J], IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,2001,47(2):638-656.
[2]Kou Yu, S.Lin, M.P.C.Fossorier. Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a
2016 28th Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3821

