Bit-flipping LDPC under noise conditions and its application to Physically Unclonable Functions

Takao Marukame and Alexandre Schmid
Microelectronic Systems Laboratory, EPFL Lausanne CH-1015, Switzerland
takao.marukame@epfl.ch, alexandre.schmid@epfl.ch

Abstract—A low-density parity check (LDPC) circuit and its properties as a post-processor is proposed for physically unclonable functions (PUFs) applications. PUFs can be realized using process variations or signal noises in SRAM or other PUF circuits, whereas the generated data needs to be processed by error check and correction (ECC) because of their inherent intra-PUF variabilities. The bit-flip LDPC circuits that have been developed in this study reveal compact constructions as well as notable noise tolerances during the ECC calculations. Unlike conventional deterministic post-processing, the LDPC circuits made even under unreliable fabrication conditions keep capable of guaranteeing robustness against noises.
Keywords—low-density parity check (LDPC); error check and correction (ECC); physically unclonable functions (PUF)
I. INTRODUCTION
Compact and robust hardware has been a crucial component for reliable IT technologies such as high speed wireless communications, mass storage systems and biomedical applications. The powerful error correction coding (or error check and corrections, ECC) technique known as lowdensity parity check (LDPC) code appears a relevant successor to improve the system. This method offers a significant error correction potential, close to the theoretical limit [1]. The LDPC codes have attracted much attention because of their wide adaptation in various data communication and storage systems, e.g., digital broadcasting, Wi-Fi, hard-disk drive, nonvolatile memory system, etc. Downscaling of MOSFET has been upgrading circuit performances, whereas bit-errors in nano-scale devices are unignorably coming within the sight of the logic and memory [2] as well as communication channels [3]. When noise occurs in the MOSFET, the drain current is inverted owing to fluctuation of the threshold voltage. Since the probability of noise is increased as the SRAM is miniaturized, a bit error may occur. Based on the errors, one possible application of physically unclonable functions (PUFs) has been highlighted [4–6].
Cryptographic keys should not be permanently stored in the system, thus ideally should only be generated when required. In conventional software-based methods, keys and other relevant data are stored in memory making it a target of physical attacks. The hardware-intrinsic key generator technology has recently emerged aiming at improving security by the means of PUFs [4–6]. SRAM-PUF circuit is the most widely used owing to its simple implementation and good PUF
Present address of Takao Marukame: Corporate R&D Center, Toshiba Corp., Kawasaki 212-8582, Japan. takao.marukame@toshiba.co.jp

performance [5, 6]. The SRAM-PUF uses a conventional SRAM cell consisting of six transistors in which the threshold voltage variability of the transistors is the origin of the cell identity. Since SRAM cells are included in almost all ICs, the SRAM-PUF can be embedded into various applications. Practical implementation techniques of a 22 nm SRAM-PUF have recently been presented [7]. SRAMs are only available in application specific integrated circuits (ASIC) or hard-macro of field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), and generate PUF data immediately after power is turned on. Instead, other latch types have been proposed and successfully demonstrated in FPGAs. In the cross-coupling of NAND gates, a more stable state is observed after post-processing in special circuits to eliminate noise effects [8].
Since PUFs take benefit from instabilities in devices or circuits, issues that should be focused on relate to improving the reliability of PUF data especially for the intra-chip variability. Ideally, inter-chip variability should be at 50%, and intra-chip variability should be corrected to be at 0% in practice. Post-processing using ECC is indispensable for practical PUFs to circumvent issues related to temporal variability. A fuzzy extractor known as the error correction approach for PUFs was proposed by Dodis et al. [9] and followed by the BCH (Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem) code [10]. We consider realizing compact LDPC circuits as a PUF post-processor.
Fig. 1. LDPC decoding. (a) LDPC Tanner graph for an example of 32 bit (3, 4). (b) Forward part, (c) backward part and (d) update part of the iterative process.
In this study, we design a bit-flip (hard bit) LDPC decoder circuit and implement it on FPGA, and clarify the post-

978-1-4799-5341-7/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

1114

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

processing performances in the decoding demonstration for PUF applications. From the detailed analysis, we further discuss the superiority of LDPC regarding noise tolerances for the sake of constructing reliable circuits even using unreliable process and non-linear device behaviors of random noises [2].

II. PROPOSED LDPC SYSTEM INCLUDING PUFS
A. Bit-flip LDPC calculation and sequence
An LDPC system is schematically shown in Fig. 1. The LDPC code is characterized by the sparse parity check matrix H and its Tanner graph representation (Fig. 1(a)) [1]. Probabilities with non-linearity characteristic applied in LDPC decoding have successfully been implemented to represent messages between nodes, and previously presented [11]. Nevertheless, the relatively large area consumption is a key issue of LDPC. Moreover, an error floor problem specific to LDPC must be considered that is potentially due to the complexity of the non-linear belief propagation calculations.
In order to realize a compact LDPC circuit, we selected a bit-flip type in which majority decisions are taken after exchanging messages consisting of ‘0’ or ‘1’, rather than softdecision that needs real value calculations. The method for decoding bit-flips using majority decisions is described in the following. After reading of a coded data string from the memory or the channel is terminated, the digital data string x ={x0, x1, ..., xi, …} is determined to be ‘0’ or ‘1’ according to whether or not a reading voltage with a value equal to or higher than a predetermined threshold is input to each variable node cx ={c0, c1, ..., ci, …}. The data string x is encoded into y0 through yn according to the following rules; HyT = 0, GHT= 0 and y = xG. Each bit of the data string may contain errors prior to decoding with the parity check matrix H, and in this case HyT = 0 is not valid. The variable node cα stores the message qi that is associated with the received digital data xα as qα. The variable node ci then transmits the calculated the messages {qαi, qαj, qαk, ...} to each of the check nodes {fi, fj, fk, ...} connected to it, where qαi = qαj = qαk =... = qα. The check node fj receives the messages {qαi, qβi, qγi, …} from each of the connected variable node {cα, cβ, cγ, …} and calculates the reply messages {rij, rkj, ...} to implement the majority decision associated with each of the connected variable nodes {ci, ck, ...}. Each message is calculated by Boolean summation that performs the parity operation expressed in equation (1-a) (Fig. 1(b)). Note that (1b) is shown as a conventional soft decision calculation in comparison.

(1-a)

∏( ) riα

=

1+ 2

1 2

ω

=β

,γ

,δ

2qωi
,L

−1

(1-b)

The message is sent to the corresponding variable node. Hence, the message transmitted from each variable node represents the value of the digital data received by the variable node. For example, assuming the sum of the values of the first messages {qij, qkj, ...} other than qij received by the check node

fj is ‘1’, then the value of the digital data to be received by the variable node ci must be ‘1’ in order to satisfy the parity condition. The message rij calculated by the check node fj is ‘1’, and the message rij is returned to the variable node ci. The variable node cα estimates the true value ci1 of the digital data associated with the variable node cα (the value of the digital data to be received by the variable node ci) by using the messages {rji, rki, ...} received from the respective connected check nodes {fj, fk, ...} and the Pα (first message qij) (Fig. 1(c)). Pα is represented by the equation (2) for a majority decision.
(2)
The variable node cα updates the value qα by majority decision using the messages {riα, rjα, rkα, ...} received from the respective connected check nodes {fi, fj, fk, ...} and the previous qα. If the number of 0 is larger than 1 in the set of {riα, rjα, rkα, .., qα}, qα is updated to be 0; otherwise the new qα is 1 (Fig. 1(d)). The parity check is performed by using the string q = {qα, qβ, qγ, ...} of estimated values obtained for each variable node {cα, cβ, cγ, ...}. If HqT = 0 is satisfied in the decoding sequence, the data string read out from the decoder is defined as the string q corresponding to the corrected value and the calculation is terminated. Finally, if HqT = 0 is not satisfied, the above algorithm is repeated until the parity condition of HqT = 0 is satisfied.
Fig. 2. Bit-flip (32, 8) LDPC decoder. The circuit schematic was synthesized from an RTL model. The green boxes show D-FFs. The size of PUF data is equal to the size of input block.
B. Implementation of compact LDPC circuits This bit-flip decoding allows the use of compact decoding
circuits because the decoder consists of Boolean operations, majority voting, interconnection, and data latches for each node. The Boolean operation is composed of multistage XOR logic circuits. Majority voting consists of AND, OR and XOR logic components. The interconnections between the nodes are a single wire. Therefore, this scheme has a significant advantage compared with soft decoding; the algorithm can be implemented by simple digital CMOS circuits. Figure 2 shows an example for a bit-flip (32, 8) LDPC decoder with 2 bit precision. The decoding sequence was confirmed by logic simulation and in FPGA (Altera cyclone IV). The performance strongly depends on the parity check matrix H characterizing LDPC. Therefore, careful consideration of the circuit area

1115
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

depending on parameters pertaining to bit precisions and code length should be taken.
III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR PUF APPLICATION
A. Error correction performance
To evaluate error correction for PUF, the PUF data can be taken, for example, from discrete SRAM chips on FPGA board (Fig. 3). The random data was analyzed in Matlab, and intraPUF variabilities were extracted as shown in Fig. 3(b). In addition, our circuit simulation regarding arbiter PUF can also generate PUF data with different input/output bit length. However, in this study, we do not focus on the quality of such PUF sources but post-processing validation of our LDPC. The code length is modified in the software to be fitted to the input data size of the LDPC circuits. In the evaluation condition, a Clanguage model is used with the PUF data as an input, error rates were converted to the format of a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) as input data. Figure 4 shows the error correction capability as a function of SNR in the LDPC decoding where four-bit precision decoding during the calculation is compared with floating-point precision (soft decoding). The low SNR (error rate is high) confirms that the errors are not perfectly corrected in both decoding methods. Better performance of soft decoding with respect to hard decoding is observed. In addition, clear error floor characteristics over 6 dB SNR in the bitflipping decoding is shown.

data for 4 bit shows more complicated behaviors as expected while higher precisions generally have higher ECC performance. The LDPC sequences are deterministic and reproducible for the error correction and the enhancement of complexity. The main issue in the implementations of bitflipping decoding consists of improving the error correction capability. It should be stressed that the complexity of data after decoding is enhanced, especially for bit-flipping LDPC.
Fig. 4. Error correction characteristics for PUF data with a code length of 128 bit. (a) 4 bit precision decoding during the calculation, (b) floating point precision (soft decision decoding).

Fig. 3. PUF data taken from SRAM chips attached to the LDPC circuit on an FPGA board as a function of Hamming distance; (a) inter-PUF and (b) intra-PUF. The original code length is 16 bit.
The concept and architecture consisting of bit-flip LDPC contributing to PUFs is proposed to provide robust processing scheme as well as the error correction capability. LDPC coding inherently has complexity as its decoding algorithm; hence it is technically difficult to trace a given calculation of LDPC with PUF seeds, even for the circuit designer. The input 32 bit data is initially taken from the bits of PUFs. The LDPC successfully corrects errors with increasing iterations that can be clearly seen in the figures exhibiting 6 dB SNR. Equal or below 5 dB SNR, the number of errors is observed to decreases first, and in contrast grows as the number of iterations increase. Consequently, the PUFs complemented with the LDPC system is shown to expand the complexity of the PUF data. Furthermore, a clear difference in terms of bit precision appears in the plot of errors as a function of the iteration. The

B. Noise effect on bit-flip LDPC
Figure 5 shows the simulation results related to the quantity of errors during the error correction process with noises. With increasing correction iterations, processes with noise rates of 0.01, 0.05 and 0.001 show lower residual errors than that without noise (Fig. 5(a)). The error correction performance sustain even when the high error rate of 0.01 exists, suggesting good noise tolerance of this LDPC system. Here we discuss the noise tolerance observed in the bit-flip LDPC and further improvements of the ECC performance by the noise. In the bitflip scheme, if an estimation result (obtained by majority decision) of one bit is inverted when errors are corrected to some extent, the other bit will not satisfy the parity condition under the influence of the inversion, while if an estimation result of the other bit is inverted, the one bit will not satisfy the parity condition under the influence of the inversion.
It can be considered that such a closed loop of calculation for correction produced by the result of likelihood calculation may be entered in a state in which errors are not corrected any more. This is similar to a stop of calculation at a local minimum of energy in physical simulations. It is therefore found that, in order to avoid the closed loop of the calculation for correction produced by the result of likelihood calculation and the state in which errors are not corrected any more in error correction in the bit-flip scheme, it is necessary to disturb the closed loop of the calculation for correction. Figure 5 (b) also shows bit errors after error correction as a function of noise rate. The results are also identical to the longer code length of 9,600 bit. It is clear that a minimum of bit errors appears at the noise rate of approximately 0.005. This indicates noise tolerance of

1116
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the developed LDPC circuits and further possibilities for intentional noises to improve the error correction performance.
Finally, we discuss further possibilities of the proposed LDPC for emerging PUFs. A number of different architectures of a PUF have been introduced using various random characteristics of circuits and systems. The fundamental principle of many proposed PUFs that include emerging magnetic RAM (MRAM) [12] and memristive devices or ReRAM [13, 14] is based on physical variability in the implemented devices. Using memristive devices for calculation, the LDPC decoder has been demonstrated [15]. In such emerging devices especially based on resistive mechanisms, the reliability of the devices is one of the critical issues for future practical applications. Nevertheless, this work provides several approaches aiming at successful usage of these technologies.
Fig. 5. Noise tolerance analysis of LDPC. (a) Number of bit-errors during the error correction process (w/ and w/o noise). (b) Residual errors after error correction vs. noise rate taken by LDPC simulation.
IV. SUMMARY A low-density parity check (LDPC) decoder circuit for physically unclonable functions (PUF) is designed and implemented focusing on the compactness of the circuit resources in this study. Data generated from PUF cells is corrected with the bit-flip LDPC procedures. Further analysis of the bit-flip LDPC architecture shows robustness against noises during error correction procedures. The LDPC with the iterative decoding is shown to keep noise tolerance, and opens a new possibility for enhancement of error correction capabilities on unreliable process conditions and unique circuit designs for PUF applications.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Drs. Y. Nishi, Y. Higashi, J. Chen, T. Tanamoto, Y. Mitani and K. Muraoka of Toshiba Corporation, and Professor T. Asai of Hokkaido University for their invaluable support and suggestions.

REFERENCES

[1] R.G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.

[2] J. Chen, T. Tanamoto, H. Noguchi and Y. Mitani, “Further Investigations on Traps Stabilities in Random Telegraph Signal Noise and the Application to a Novel Concept Physical Unclonable Function (PUF) with Robust Reliabilities,” Symposium on VLSI Technology, pp. T40–T41, 2015.

[3] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and A. Burg, “Density Evolution for Min-Sum Decoding of LDPC Codes Under Unreliable Message Storage,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 849–852, May 2014.

[4] P. Tuyls, B. Skoric, S. Stallinga, A.H.M. Akkermans and W. Ophey, “Information-Theoretic Security Analysis of Physical Unclonable Functions,” Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pp. 141–155, 2005.

[5] R. Maes, “Physically Unclonable Functions: Constractions, Properties and Applications,” PhD dissertation, Aug. 2012.

[6] G.E. Suh and S. Devadas, “Physical Unclonable Functions for Device Authentication and Secret Key Generation,” Design Automation Conference (DAC’07), June 2007.

[7] S.K. Mathew, S.K. Satpathy, M.A. Anders, H. Kaul, S. K. Hsu, A. Agarwal, G.K. Chen, R.J. Parker, R.K. Krishnamurthy and V. De, “A 0.19pJ/b PVT-Variation-Tolerant Hybrid Physically Unclonable Function Circuit for 100% Stable Secure Key Generation in 22nm CMOS,” IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference Dig. Tech. Papers, pp. 278–280, 2014.

[8] K. Yang, Q. Dong, D. Blaauw and D. Sylvester, “A physically unclonable function with ber< 10- 8 for robust chip authentication using
oscillator collapse in 40nm cmos,” in IEEE international Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), 14.2, 2015.

[9] Y. Dodis, R. Ostrovsky, L. Reyzin and A. Smith, “Fuzzy Extractors: How to Generate Strong Keys from Biometrics and Other Noisy Data,” (A preliminary version of this paper appeared in Eurocrypt 2004) SIAM J. Comput., vol. 38(1), pp. 97–139, 2008.

[10] H. Kang, Y. Hori, T. Katashita, M. Hagiwara and K. Iwamura,

“Cryptographic Key Generation from PUF Data Using Efficient Fuzzy

Extractors,” 16th International Conference on

Advanced

Communication Technology (ICACT), pp. 23–26, 2014.

[11] D. Miyashita, R. Yamaki, K. Hashiyoshi, H. Kobayashi, S. Kousai, Y. Oowaki and Y. Unekawa, “A 10.4pJ/b (32, 8) LDPC Decoder with Time-Domain Analog and Digital Mixed-Signal Processing,” IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference Dig. Tech. Papers, pp. 420–422, 2013.

[12] T. Marukame, T. Tanamoto and Y. Mitani, “Extracting physically unclonable function (PUF) from spin transfer switching characteristics in magnetic tunnel junctions,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 1–4, 2014.

[13] U. Ruhrmair, C. Jaeger, M. Bator, M. Stutzmann, P. Lugli and G. Csaba., “Applications of High-Capacity Crossbar Memories in Cryptography,” IEEE Trans. Nanotech., pp. 489–497, 2011.

[14] J. Rajendran, R.Karri, J.B. Wendt, M. Potkonjak, N. McDonald, G.S. Rose, and B. Wysocki, “Nano Meets Security: Exploring Nanoelectronic Devices for Security Applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 103, no. 5, pp. 829–849, 2015.

[15] J.H. Poikonen, E. Lehtonen, M. Laiho and Jonne K. Poikonen, “Memristive Circuits for LDPC Decoding,” IEEE J. on emerging and selected topics in circutis and systems, vol. 4, no. 4, Dec. 2014

1117
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:35:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

