IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

909

Reduced-Complexity Linear Programming Decoding Based on ADMM for LDPC Codes
Haoyuan Wei, Xiaopeng Jiao, and Jianjun Mu

Abstract—The Euclidean projection onto check polytopes is the most time-consuming operation in the linear programming (LP) decoding based on alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. In this letter, instead of reducing the complexity of Euclidean projection itself, we propose a new method to reduce the decoding complexity of ADMM-based LP decoder by decreasing the number of Euclidean projections. In particular, if all absolute values of the element-wise differences between the input vector of Euclidean projection in the current iteration and that in the previous iteration are less than a predefined value, then the Euclidean projection at the current iteration will be no longer performed. Simulation results show that the proposed decoder can still save roughly 20% decoding time even if both the over-relaxation and early termination techniques are used.
Index Terms—Linear programming decoding, alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM), reduce-complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
L INEAR programming (LP) decoding, proposed by Feldman in [1], is an alternative decoding method for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Recently, based on the optimization method of alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [3], Barman et al. proposed an efficient LP decoding algorithm, called ADMM-based LP decoder [2], that has complexity comparable to the belief propagation (BP) decoder. The most time-consuming part of the ADMM-based LP decoding is the Euclidean projection onto the check polytope, which is a convex hull of all binary vectors with an even number of 1s. The length of these binary vectors is equal to the degree of check nodes.
To reduce the complexity of ADMM-based LP decoder further, Zhang et al. proposed an efficient projection algorithm [4] based on the cut search algorithm introduced in [5]. Later, in [6], the projection operation onto a check polytope is transformed to a projection onto a simplex. The complexity of projection operations in [2] is O(d log d), where d is the degree of check node.The transformation makes the complexity of the projection operation reduce to O(d) [6]. In addition to reducing the complexity of the projection operation, the over-relaxation and early termination are also two effective techniques [3] to reduce the complexity of the ADMM-based LP decoder.
Some existing algorithms described above try to reduce the complexity of ADMM-based LP decoder by reducing the
Manuscript received February 19, 2015; revised March 19, 2015; accepted March 27, 2015. Date of publication March 31, 2015; date of current version June 5, 2015. This work is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 61471286 and No. 61271004) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was M. Baldi.
The authors are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: hehewhy@gmail.com; jiaozi1216@126.com; jjmu@xidian.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2418261

complexity of projection operation. In this letter, we propose an efficient algorithm to decrease the number of projection operations for the ADMM-based LP decoding. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm can decrease the number of projection operations significantly at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regions.

II. PRELIMINARIES

Suppose an LDPC Code C is defined by a m × n parity check matrix H. Let I = {1, 2, . . . , n} and J = {1, 2, . . . , m} denote the set of variable nodes and check nodes of C, respectively. Let Ni denote the set of neighboring check nodes of variable node i. Similarly, let Nj denote the set of neighboring variable nodes of check node j. We also use di and dj to denote the degree of variable node i ∈ I and check node j ∈ J , respectively. Suppose that a codeword x ∈ C is transmitted over
a memoryless binary-input output-symmetric channel, and a
vector y is received. In [1] the authors proposed an LP decoder
to solve the following optimization problem:

minimize γT x

subject to P jx ∈ PPdj , ∀j ∈ J ,

(1)

where γ is the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) vector and the i-

th entry of γ is defined as γi = log

P r(y|xi=0) P r(y|xi=1)

, P j is the

operation of selecting the sub-vector of x corresponding to the

j-th check node, and PPdj is defined as the convex hull of all even-parity binary vectors of length dj, called check polytope.

The ADMM-based LP decoding of (1) is formulated as:

minimize γT x subject to P jx = zj, zj ∈ PPdj , ∀j ∈ J , (2)

where zjs are auxiliary variables of length dj, aiming to

constrain x to satisfy the j-th check node.

The augmented Lagrangian for the above problem is

Lμ(x, z, λ) = γT x+

λj

(P

j

x

−

z

j

)+

μ 2

P j x−zj 22,

j

j

(3)

where λjs are Lagrangian multipliers and μ is a constant that

needs to be optimized. The updates for each component of the

variables using ADMM to solve problem (2) are described as

follows [2]:

⎛

⎞

xi =

1⎝ [0,1] di j∈Nv(i)

zj(i)

−

1 μ

λ(ji)

−

1 μ

γi⎠

,

(4)

zj = PPdj (Pj x + λj /μ),

(5)

λj = λj + μ(P jx − zj),

(6)

where [0,1] is the Euclidean projection to the interval [0, 1], and PPdj is the Euclidean projection onto check polytopes.

1558-2558 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized liceSneseedhtutspe://lwimwitewd.iteoe:eY.oorngs/peui Ublniciva.tDioonws_nslotaanddeadrdosn/pJuubnleic2a4ti,2o0n2s/6riagth1ts6/:i5n0d:e4x1.hUtTmCl ffroormmIoErEeEinXfoprlomrea.tioRne.strictions apply.

910

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

TABLE I PERCENTAGE OF UNUSEFUL PROJECTIONS FOR
C1 USING STANDARD ADMM DECODER
TABLE II PERCENTAGE OF UNUSEFUL PROJECTIONS FOR
C2 USING STANDARD ADMM DECODER

The effectiveness of introducing ε is based on the following two observations. First of all, the difference of outputs of the Euclidean projections can be neglected if the difference of their input vectors are small enough. Secondly, for iterative algorithms, it is not necessary to calculate exact values of variables in each iteration. One can use approximate values as long as it can converge.

Algorithm 1 Reduced-complexity ADMM-based LP decoding

It is observed that the ADMM-based LP decoder has worse

error performance than the BP decoder at low SNR values. To

address this problem, Liu et al. proposed a penalized ADMM

decoder which adds a penalty term into the objective function

of the LP formulation [7]. When l1 penalty terms are used,

the objective function of problem (2) should be replaced with

γT x − α

n i=1

|xi

−

0.5|,

where

α

is

a

parameter

which

can

be optimized in advance. The detailed updates of x, zj and λj

for l1 penalized ADMM decoder can be found in [7].

III. REDUCED-COMPLEXITY ADMM-BASED LP DECODING
In this section, we consider to decrease the number of Euclidean projection operations. First, we present the motivation and then illustrate it using the IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes [8]. Then the algorithmic details of the reduced-complexity ADMM-based LP decoding is proposed.

A. Motivation
Based on simulations, we found that when the ADMM algorithm tends to converge, a majority of variables have stable values and only a few variables still change. That is to say, at the late phase of ADMM-based LP decoding, most input vectors of Euclidean projections in the current iteration may be the same with those in the previous iteration. In this case, the Euclidean projections can be avoided and we call them unuseful projections.
To illustrate the effectiveness of the above idea, we consider two LDPC codes: a (576, 288) rate-1/2 LDPC code C1 and a (1152,288) rate-3/4 LDPC code C2. Both C1 and C2 are chosen from IEEE 802.16e standard [8]. Table I and Table II present the average percentage of unuseful projections in a decoding frame at different SNRs for C1 and C2, respectively. For both codes, the percentage of unuseful projections increases as SNR increases. In particular, for C2 at SNR = 5.2 dB, more than 70% Euclidean projections are useless, which means more than 70% projections can be avoided.

B. Algorithmic Details
The observation in the last subsection motivates us to design a reduced-complexity LP decoding algorithm based on ADMM by trying to decrease the number of projection operations. The basic design rule is to decrease the number of projection operations as many as possible while keeping the decoding performance unchanged. Generally speaking, to decrease the

1: Construct the log-likelihood vector γ based on

received word y

2: Construct the dj × N matrix P j for all j ∈ J 3: Initialize λj as the all-zero vector, zj and wjold as the all
0.5 vector for all j ∈ J

4: repeat

5: for all i ∈ I do update xi with penalty term

6:

ti =

j

zj(i)

−

1 μ

λ(ji)

−

1 μ

γi

7: if ti ≥ di/2 then

8:

xi =

[0,1]

1 di

ti

+

α μ

9: else

10:

xi =

[0,1]

1 di

ti

−

α μ

11: end if

12: end for

13: for all j ∈ J do

14:

wjnew = P j x + λj /μ

15:

Δwj = wjnew − wjold

16: if ∃|Δwj(k)| > ε then

17:

zj = PPdj (wnj ew)

18: end if

19:

wojld = wnj ew

20: end for

update zj

21: for all j ∈ J do update λj 22: λj = λj + μ(P jx − zj)
23: end for 24: until maxj P jx − zj < ( = 10−5 in this letter)

Based on the above anaylysis, the proposed reducedcomplexity LP decoding algorithm based on ADMM is described in Algorithm 1. In the algorithm, the vector wjold denotes the vector projected onto the check polytope corresponding to the j-th check node in the previous iteration. At the beginning of the algorithm, it is initialized as all 0.5 vector. When zj is going to be updated, the difference vector, Δwj, between the input vectors of Euclidean projection in the current iteration and the previous iteration will be calculated first. If any component of Δwj has an absolute value larger than the predefined value ε, the projection operation must be performed. Otherwise, the projection will be avoided and zj will not be updated in the current iteration.
We make three remarks for the proposed algorithm:
(1) The parameter ε should be selected carefully. In the

number of projection operations further, we can introduce a parameter with small positive value ε. For the check polytope corresponding to a check node, let p denote the vector of

proposed algorithm, more projection operations can be avoided by choosing a larger ε. However, this choice may lead to the ADMM algorithm converge slowly or

element-wise differences between the input vector of Euclidean projection of the current iteration and that of the previous iteration. If all entries of p are less than ε, then the Euclidean

fail to converge due to the inaccuracy of Euclidean projections. In the next section, we will use simulations to search the optimal ε that can achieve fast decoding

projections of the current iteration can be avoided.

and exhibit negligible performance loss.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:50:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING BASED ON ADMM FOR LDPC CODES

911

Fig. 1. The average decoding time of C1 using the proposed decoder with different ε values and the standard ADMM decoder.

Fig. 2. FER performances of C1 using the standard ADMM decoder, the proposed decoder with different ε values and the BP decoder.

(2) In line 17 of the proposed algorithm, we choose the pro-

jection method proposed in [4]. It should be noted that

there is a more efficient projection algorithm proposed

in [6]. However, from Fig. 1 in [6] we can see that the

time complexity of the projection methods in [4] and [6]

are similar when the degree of check node is less than

10. In our simulations, most of the check nodes in the

chosen LDPC codes have degrees less than 10.

(3) It should be noted that our method is similar with the

warm start strategy in the software [9] implemented by

Liu. In the warm start strategy, the projection is per-

formed when the condition

dj k=1

|Δwj(k)|

>

ε

is

satis-

fied (ε is set to 10−6 in [9]). In our method, however, the

projection is performed at once when the absolute value

of one component of Δwj is larger than ε. Moreover, we

will also consider the optimal choice of ε by simulations

in this letter.

Fig. 3. The average decoding time of C2 using the proposed decoder with different ε values and the standard ADMM decoder.
of the proposed algorithm increases as ε increases from zero, which will spend less decoding time than the standard ADMM-

based LP decoder, just as the curve in Fig. 1 shows when ε

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we first show how to choose the optimal ε for C1 and C2 with the proposed algorithm by simulations. Then the decoding time of the proposed algorithm is compared with the standard ADMM-based LP decoder. For the simulations, we use the l1 penalty method for the ADMM algorithm since its good error-correcting performance. The parameter μ is set to 2.8 for both C1 and C2. The penalty parameter α is chosen by simulations according to the method in [7]. For C1, α is set to 1.7. For C2, α is set to 1.6. The simulations are performed over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with binary phrase shift keying (BPSK).

increases from 0 to 0.0001. However, the large ε may lead to the result of Euclidean projection not accurate enough and the ADMM algorithm will need more iterations to converge, which will consume more decoding time than the standard ADMMbased LP decoder. This is reflected in Fig. 1 when ε > 0.0001. It should also be noted that when ε = 0, the proposed algorithm needs the same number of iterations as the standard decoder while a large number of projection operations are avoided, which leads to a significant time reduction as shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 2 shows the frame error rate (FER) performances of C1 for the standard ADMM-based LP decoder and the proposed algorithm with different values of ε. The points plotted in all FER curves are obtained by generating at least 200 error

frames. It can be seen that for small values of ε, such as 0.0001,

A. Choice of ε

0.0005 and 0.0009 in Fig. 2, the decoding performances at the simulated SNR regions are almost the same as that of the stan-

In Fig. 1, we plot the average decoding time per frame as dard ADMM-based LP decoder. It means that we can use the

a function of ε at different SNRs for C1 with the proposed optimal ε = 0.0001 for the proposed algorithm without any loss algorithm and the standard ADMM-based LP decoder. The of decoding performance. Similarly, Fig. 3 shows the average

average decoding time at each point in Fig. 1 is obtained by decoding time per frame as a function of ε at different SNRs

performing the decoding method with 1 000 000 frames. It can for C2 with the proposed algorithm and the standard ADMMbe seen that for all the simulated SNR values, the decoding based LP decoding. Fig. 4 shows the FER performances of C2 time of the proposed algorithm attains minimum at ε = 0.0001 with the two decoding algorithms at different ε values. It can

and then it increases as ε increases. This phenomenon can be seen that the observations about C2 are similar as that of C1. be explained as follows. The number of avoidable projections In Fig. 2 and Fig. 4 we also show FER performances for C1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:50:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

912

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 4. FER performances of C2 using the standard ADMM decoder, the proposed decoder with different ε values and the BP decoder.

Fig. 6. Comparison of the average decoding time of C2 using ADMM decoders and the sum-product BP decoder.

time for C2 when Eb/N0 = 5.6 dB. The percentage of unuseful projections for the above two simulation points is 66% and 75%, respectively. The percentage of other simulation points is not provided due to space limitations. Moreover, the average decoding time of the sum-product BP decoder is also shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 for comparison.

Fig. 5. Comparison of the average decoding time of C1 using ADMM decoders and the sum-product BP decoder.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we have proposed a reduced-complexity LP decoder based on ADMM for LDPC codes by decreasing the number of Euclidean projection operations. Though the proposed algorithm is simple, simulation results show that the number of projections can be decreased significantly, which leads to a considerable reduction of the decoding time.

and C2 respectively using the sum-product BP decoder. The BP decoder is implemented in the log domain and the maximum allowable number of iterations is set to 100. It can be seen that the performances of the ADMM-based LP decoder and the BP decoder are similar.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments which helped improve the quality of this letter.
REFERENCES

B. Comparison of Average Decoding Time

[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51,

Now we investigate the decoding complexity of the pro-
posed algorithm. Fig. 5 shows the average decoding time per frame of C1 decoded by the standard ADMM-based LP decoder, the proposed decoder with ε = 0.0001 and the BP

no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005. [2] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition method
for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7870–7886, Dec. 2013. [3] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed

decoder. The decoding time of ADMM decoders using overrelaxation (OR) and early termination (ET) are also presented in Fig. 5 to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm. Similarly, the average decoding time per frame of C2 for each decoder is compared in Fig. 6. From these figures we can see that there is a considerable time reduction for the proposed algorithm when compared with the standard ADMMbased LP decoder. For example, compared with the standard ADMM-based LP decoder, the proposed algorithm can save roughly 41% time for C1 when Eb/N0 = 5.8 dB and 40% time for C2 when Eb/N0 = 5.6 dB. When over-relaxation and early termination are used in the standard ADMM-based LP decoders, the proposed algorithm with the same techniques can still save 22.6% time for C1 when Eb/N0 = 5.8 dB and 21.5%

optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122, Jan. 2011. [4] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient iterative LP decoding of LDPC Codes with alternating direction method of multipliers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 1501–1505. [5] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive cut generation algorithm for improved linear programming decoding of binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 6581–6594, Oct. 2012. [6] G. Zhang, R. Heusdens, and W. B. Kleijn , “Large scale LP decoding with low complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 2152–2155, Nov. 2013. [7] X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “The l1 penalized decoder and its reweighted LP,” in Proc. 50th Allerton, pp. 1572–1579, Oct. 2012. [8] LDPC coding for OFDMA PHY, IEEE C802.16e-05/0066r3, Jan. 2005. [9] X. Liu, “ADMM Decoder.” [Online]. Available: https://sites.google.com/ site/xishuoliu/codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:50:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

