IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

1165

True-Damage-Aware Enumerative Coding for Improving NAND Flash Memory Endurance
Jiangpeng Li, Kai Zhao, Jun Ma, and Tong Zhang

Abstract— This brief presents a technique that can fully exploit the data dependency of flash memory cell damage to improve the program/erase (P/E) cycling endurance of NAND flash memory. The key is to opportunistically leverage data lossless compressibility and utilize the compression gain to realize memory-damage-aware data manipulation to reduce the cycling-induced physical damage. Based upon experiments using commercial sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash memory chips, we show that the proposed design technique can improve the P/E cycling endurance by 50%. We further carried out application-specific integrated circuit design to demonstrate the practical feasibility for implementing the proposed design technique.

Fig. 1. Illustration of MLC NAND flash memory cell.

Index Terms— Endurance, enumerative coding, NAND flash memory.

I. INTRODUCTION

Fig. 2. Illustration of the overall design strategy for improving endurance.

Continuous technology scaling makes flash memory cells

increasingly subject to wear-out (or damage) caused by This brief presents a selection-based enumerative coding technique

program/erase (P/E) cycling. To mitigate this negative effect to realize the 1-to-1 mapping within the compression and mapping

of technology scaling, researchers developed many techniques data manipulation design framework. Compared with the one used

at the architecture and system levels, e.g., more powerful error in [7], it can more effectively exploit the data dependency of

correction code (ECC) and more effective flash translation layer memory damage and hence improve the P/E cycling endurance.

design schemes [1]–[5]. This brief is interested in how to leverage In addition, we develop a scheme to more accurately measure the

the data-dependent nature of flash memory wear-out to improve P/E data dependency of memory cell damage and quantify endurance

cycling endurance.

improvement. To demonstrate the effectiveness, we carried out exten-

Each NAND flash memory cell is a floating-gate transistor that sive experiments using commercial sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash

stores different data content (e.g., 11, 10, 00, and 01 in MLC flash memory chips. Results show that, with the data compression ratio

memory) by moving different amount of electrons into the floating- of 1.5:1, the proposed design technique can improve the P/E cycling

gate layer through gate oxide. The significance of memory cell endurance by 25% compared with [7] and 50% compared with damage strongly depends on the amount of electrons passing through conventional practice (i.e., directly write the original data without any

gate oxide. Therefore, the damage caused by each P/E cycle strongly compression and mapping data manipulation). In addition, we carried

depends on the content being stored in each memory cell. A design out application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) design at 65-nm

framework was presented in [7] to improve the cycling endurance node to implement the proposed technique with 1-GB/s throughput,

by exploiting such data dependency of memory cell damage, which and the results show that the silicon cost is not significant.

can be described as follows. Before writing user data into a flash

memory physical page, we first apply lossless data compression to reduce the data size (e.g., from Np -bit to N˜ p -bit, where Np > N˜ p ), then apply a 1-to-1 {0, 1}N˜ p → {0, 1}Np mapping to restore the compressed data back to Np -bit data. If the 1-to-1 data mapping is designed appropriately, the memory damage caused by writing the
new Np -bit data can be less than directly writing the original Np -bit data or the compressed data. The enumerative coding [8], a technique
developed for data compression originally, has been used in [7] to realize the 1-to-1 {0, 1}N˜ p → {0, 1}Np mapping.

II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATIONS
The NAND flash memory handles data programming and read in the unit of page. For multibit per cell NAND flash memory (e.g., 2 b/cell MLC NAND flash memory, as shown in Fig. 1), different bits within each memory cell belong to different pages. Flash memory cells gradually wear out with P/E cycling mainly because of the oxide damage caused by the electrons passing through the gate oxide. As shown in Fig. 1, different data content (e.g., 11, 10, 00, and 01 in MLC NAND flash memory cells) correspond to different number of

Manuscript received December 11, 2013; revised March 26, 2014; accepted June 9, 2014. Date of publication July 8, 2014; date of current version May 20, 2015.
J. Li was with the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China. He is now with the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: lijiangpeng1984@gmail.com).
J. Ma is with the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: majun@sjtu.edu.cn).
K. Zhao and T. Zhang are with the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (e-mail: zk448210@gmail.com; tong.zhang@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2014.2332099

electrons and hence different amount of memory cell damage.
Such an explicit data dependency of flash memory cell wear-out
exposes a potential for improving NAND flash memory P/E cycling
endurance, as demonstrated in the pioneering work [7]. Fig. 2 shows
the general design strategy. Let Np denote the flash memory page size (i.e., 4 or 8 kB in current practice). If a page of user data can be compressed to the size of N˜ p , and let U and U˜ denote the original user data and compressed user data. Since each program operation
always program all the Np memory cells in one page, we should carry out a f : {0, 1}N˜ p → {0, 1}Np mapping to expand the compressed data U˜ with the size of N˜ p into a page data Uˆ with the size of Np .

1063-8210 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 3. Illustration of the proposed method for more accurately quantifying the flash memory cell damage caused by each distinct data content.

Let (U) and (Uˆ ) denote the aggregated damage caused by storing

the original user data page U and the compressed and mapped data
page Uˆ , clearly we want to have (U) > (Uˆ ) and maximize (U ) − (Uˆ ) by appropriately choosing the mapping function f .

Jagmohan et al. [7] proposed to apply enumerative coding [8]

to search for appropriate mapping functions. Due to the very large values of Np and N˜ p , a direct nontrivial {0, 1}N˜ p → {0, 1}Np mapping has a prohibitively high-computational complexity. Hence,

we should decompose it into many individual mappings with much

less size, as suggested in [7]. For example, we can partition

the entire compressed page U˜ into many m-bit segments (where

m

Np ). Let n = m · Np /N˜ p , we can construct a

fs : {0, 1}m → {0, 1}n mapping to map each m-bit segment into an

n-bit segment. All the n-bit segments form a complete page, which

is written into an entire physical page. In [7], enumerative coding

has been used to realize the mapping functions for MLC NAND

flash memory, where the lower page and upper page along the same

wordline are processed completely independently from each other.

III. PROPOSED DESIGN SOLUTIONS

Under the design framework pioneered by [7], to truly maximize the endurance gain, we should appropriately address two key aspects, including:

1) accurate estimation of flash memory cell damage caused by

different data content;

2)

development {0, 1}m →

of {0,

appropriate mapping 1}n for lower pages

functions and fs(u)

(e.g., fs(l) : : {0, 1}m →

{0, 1}n for upper pages in MLC memory) that can truly

minimize the damage.

In this section, we present solutions that can further enhance the prior work [7] from both aspects.

A. Estimation of Data-Dependent Memory Cell Damage
It is very critical to accurately quantify the difference of the flash memory cell damage caused by different data content, based on which we can only develop and evaluate various mapping functions. In [7], each distinct cell content (e.g., 11, 10, 00, and 01 for MLC memory) is repeatedly written to all the memory cells over a wide range of P/E cycles, and the corresponding raw bit error rate (BER) is used to quantify the physical damage caused by this data content. However, due to various data-dependent noise and distortion sources in NAND flash memory [6] (e.g., cell-to-cell interference and program disturb), such a uniform test method may not accurately reveal the data-dependent damage in practice.
In this brief, we propose a method, as shown in Fig. 3, to more accurately characterize the memory cell damage caused by each distinct data content. To quantify the damage caused by one data content denoted as Dtest, we write data into the block by mixing Dtest and random data, as shown in Fig. 3. Each memory cell written with Dtest is surrounded by memory cells written with random data to more accurately capture the effect of cell-to-cell interference

Fig. 4. Measured raw BER when using the proposed and the uniform testing method for the four different memory cell content in sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash memory.

and program disturb in practice. We call the memory cells written

with Dtest as cells under test (CUT) and the locations of all the CUT are fixed throughout all the P/E cycles. We record the raw BER of

all the CUT every a few hundreds P/E cycles by writing random data

to all the memory cells.

Using commercial sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash memory chips (each die contains two planes, each plane contains 2048 blocks,

and each block contains 256 pages), we carried out experiments to

estimate damage caused by the four different memory cell content, and Fig. 4 shows the measured raw BER under different P/E

cycles. In addition, we carried out experiments using the uniform

test method in [7], and present the results in Fig. 4 as well. It clearly shows that the uniform test method largely underestimates

the damage caused by 11 and overestimates the damage caused

by 01.

Since we are interested in P/E cycling endurance, the raw BER

should not be directly used to quantify the difference of damage

caused by different cell content. Instead, the damage quantification

should directly relate to the P/E cycling. For L-bit/cell NAND flash memory, let ψ(i)(ρ) denote the raw BER at ρ P/E cycles when

writing memory cells with i. Assume the error correction capability can tolerate up to BERmax, and let ρm(ia)x denote the P/E cycle number under which the raw BER ψ (i)(ρ) equals to BERmax. To represent
the damage caused by writing i into a memory cell (where 0 ≤ i ≤ 2L − 1), we define the damage factor C(i) as

C (i )

=

ρmin ρm(ia)x

,

where ρmin = min ρm(ia)x, i ∈ 0, 2L − 1 . (1)

B. Proposed Selection-Based Enumerative Coding

As discussed in Section II, for MLC NAND flash memory, we

should {0, 1}n

appropriately design the mapping for lower pages and fs(u) : {0,

functions fs(l) : 1}m → {0, 1}n

{0, 1}m → for upper

pages, with the objective of minimizing the overall flash memory

cell damage. Since MLC NAND flash memory first programs lower

page and then programs upper page, we propose a selection-based

enumerative coding strategy to reduce the overall memory damage.

As shown in Fig. 5, compared with the independent enumerative

coding in [7], the key here is to carry out the upper page data mapping

dependent upon the coded lower page data.

As shown in Fig. 5, we use the same lower page mapping function fs(l) to maximize the number of ones, and carry out the upper page mapping function fs(u) by explicitly considering of the coded lower
page data to truly minimize the flash memory damage. To realize the upper page {0, 1}m → {0, 1}n mapping, we first evenly partition the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

1167

set {0, 1}n into 2n−m subsets Bk for 1 ≤ k ≤ 2n−m so that the
hamming weight of any n-bit element in the subset Bi is not smaller than that of any n-bit element in subset Bi+ j ∀ j > 0. Therefore, we can construct 2n−m 1-to-1 mapping {0, 1}m → Bk for 1 ≤ k ≤ 2n−m . As shown in Fig. 5, for each m-bit segment

in the compressed upper page data, we first carry out all the 2n−m 1-to-1 mappings. Let ω(k) denote the output of the 1-to-1 map-

ping corresponding to the subset Bk , and ν denote the corresponding n-bit coded lower page data, we should use the output associated

with the tth subset and

⎧

⎫

⎨n

⎬

t

=

arg min
1≤k≤2n−m

⎩
i =1

C

2νi + ωi(k)

⎭

(2)

where C(i) is the damage factor for memory cell content i as defined
in (1). This selection process is shown in Fig. 5 and referred to as selection-based enumerative coding. Each {0, 1}m → Bk mapping can be implemented with the following three steps.

1) Let d denote the decimal value of the m-bit mapping input, we

first determine the Hamming weight λ of the n-bit mapping

output ω(k) as

⎧

⎫

⎨n n

λ

=

arg min
n≥λ ≥0

⎩
i =λ

i

n
∀

n i

⎬ ≥ 2m · k − d⎭.

i =λ

(3)

2) Then, we determine the index of the weight-λ mapping output ω(k) as

n
h = 2m × k − d −

n.

(4)

i=λ+1 i

3) Let S denote the set that contains all the n-bit sequence

with Hamming weight of λ, and ns ( p1, p2,…, pb) denote

the total number of elements in S whose first b bits are

p1, the

p2,…, pb, i.e., ns (0) = mapping output ω(k),

n−1 λ

.

We

denoted as

can recursively {ω1(k), ω2(k),…,

derive ωn(k ) },

bit-by-bit using the simple procedure as described below:

If h else

≥ ns (0) set ω1(k)

set ω1(k) = 0;

=

1

and

set

h

=

h

−

ns (0);

For i = 2,…, n if (h ≥ ns (ω1(k), ω2(k)…ωi(−k)1, 0)) ωi(k) = 1; h = h − ns (ω1(k), ω2(k),…, ωi(−k)1, 0); else ωi(k) = 0.

Fig. 5. Illusion of the enumerative coding for MLC memory. (a) Independent enumerative coding. (b) Proposed selection-based enumerative coding.
Fig. 6. Cell damage under different n and different expansion factor, normalized to that of the baseline scenario (i.e., without using compression).

In practice, if 2n−m is too large, we can carry out the above

selection-based enumerative coding within a constrained space, i.e., given ⊂ [1, 2n−m ], we only need to select among the | | 1-to-1 mapping output {0, 1}m → Bk for k ∈ . When | | is 1, it
reduces to the independent enumerative coding.

When we read data from NAND flash memory, we must carry out the reverse 1-to-1 {0, 1}n → {0, 1}m mapping by reversing the above

procedure, i.e., given the n-bit sequence ω, we need to recover the

original m-bit sequence. First, we carry out the reverse process of

step 3 to recover h from ω, which is very simple and has been

discussed in [8]. Given the value of h and the Hamming weight λ

of ω, we can directly derive the decimal value of the original m-bit

sequence according to (4), i.e., we simply do a modulo division of

h+

n

n

i=λ+1 i

mod 2m . We note that the reverse 1-to-1 mapping

for the upper page does not need the lower page data, hence the

proposed selection-based enumerative coding design solution will not

incur any extra flash memory read latency overhead.

Fig. 7. Normalized cell damage under different design scenarios.

IV. EVALUATION RESULTS

We carried out experiments to evaluate the potential effectiveness

of the proposed design strategy and study the silicon implementation

cost. We considered three scenarios: 1) the baseline scenario where

we do not carry out data compression; 2) the compression-only

scenario where we only carry out data compression and simply

append ones to form the complete page; and 3) the compression + EC

scenario where we first carry out data compression and then use

enumerative coding to the complete page.

For L-bit/cell NAND flash memory, we define the cell damage as

2L −1 i =0

C

(i

)

·

pi ,

where

C (i )

is

the

damage

factor

of

the

memory

cell content i and pi is the probability that a memory cell stores i.

Clearly, the three scenarios only differ at the pi .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 8. ECC decoding failure rate versus P/E cycling results for different compression + EC and corresponding normalized P/E cycling endurance. (a) Independent enumerative coding. (b) Selection-based enumerative coding with | | = 2n−m . Four different expansion factors, including 16:4, 16:8, 16:12, and 16:15 are considered for each scenario. (c) Normalized P/E cycling endurance.
TABLE I SELECTION-BASED ENUMERATIVE CODING WITH n = 16

Fig. 9. Normalized cell damage and endurance gain for storing DLL and EXE files.

TABLE II LZ LOSSLESS COMPRESSION AND DECOMPRESSION

A. Effectiveness of the Proposed Solution
We carried out the experiments using commercial sub-22-nm MLC
NAND flash memory chips, where each physical page is 8.5 kB
(including 8-kB user data and 0.5-kB redundancy). We define the expansion factor as the ratio of the size of uncompressed data and
compressed data. We first investigate the achievable improvement by the compression + EC techniques for a wide rang of data compression ratio with 1 to 4, where pseudorandom data are used to represent compressed data. For the 1-to-1 {0, 1}m → {0, 1}n mapping, given the expansion factor, the larger the n is, the smaller the cell damage
can be. This is because, as we increase the value of n, we will have a larger freedom to choose those less-damaging memory cell content in the 1-to-1 {0, 1}m → {0, 1}n mapping. Fig. 6 shows the cell damage for different values of n under a wide range of expansion factor,
which are normalized with the values of the baseline scenario. For the compression + EC scenario, we use the proposed selection-based enumerative coding and set = [1, 2n−m ] (i.e., we consider all the coding possibilities to achieve the best possible result). As shown in Fig. 6, as the expansion factor increases, both compression-only and compression + EC can achieve a higher reduction of cell damage. Meanwhile, as the expansion factor increases, the advantage of the compression + EC over compression-only tends to increase first and then reduce, as shown in Fig. 6. For the compression + EC scenario, the cell damage reduces as we increase the value of n, but the gain
tends to quickly diminish as n is larger than 16. As discussed above, if 2n−m is too large, we can reduce the imple-
mentation complexity by limiting the selection in ⊂ [1, 2n−m ] (i.e., we only select among the | | 1-to-1 mapping output {0, 1}m → Bk for k ∈ ). The size of (i.e., | |) directly affects the effectiveness, i.e., the larger | | is, the more cell damage can be reduced. Fig. 7 shows the cell damage (normalized with the baseline scenario) under different value of | | when n is set to 16. For the purpose of comparison, Fig. 7 also shows the normalized cell damage when using compression + EC with independent enumerative coding. The results clearly show that the proposed selection-based

enumerative coding strategy outperforms the independent enumerative coding.
To further study the endurance gain, we use a length-2 kB, rate-0.94 LDPC code as the ECC. Fig. 8(a) and (b) shows the simulated decoding failure rate versus P/E cycling under different scenarios. In addition, by setting the target decoding failure rate as 10−12, we further estimate the achievable P/E cycling endurance when using different design strategies, as shown in Fig. 8(c) where the results are normalized against P/E cycling endurance of the baseline scenario. The results clearly show a strong dependency of endurance gain on the data compressibility. Under modest data compressibility (e.g., compression ratio of around 1.5:1), the independent enumerative coding can only achieve a marginal gain over the compression-only scenario, while the proposed selection-based design strategy can noticeably improve the endurance gain. For example, at the data compression ratio of 1.5:1, the independent enumerative coding can only improve the endurance by 4.3% and 20% over the compression-only and baseline scenarios, while the proposed design solution can improve the endurance by 30.4% and 50% over these two scenarios, i.e., the proposed design solution outperforms the independent enumerative coding by 25%. We note that, due to the inevitable interdie variation, the damage factors defined in (1) could vary from one die to the other, which can result in different absolute values of endurance gain, but the effectiveness of this proposed design solution should remain noticeable.
We further investigated the effectiveness of the proposed design solution using a large number of DLL and EXE files. Our results show that the compression ratio of DLL files has a mean of 1.64:1 with the variance of 0.047, and the compression ratio of EXE files has a mean of 1.35:1 with the variance of 0.019. Accordingly, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 23, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

1169

estimated the cell damage and endurance gain as shown in Fig. 9, where the results are normalized against the baseline scenario.

B. Silicon Implementation Cost

We further studied the silicon cost for implementing the lossless

data compression/decompression and selection-based enumerative

coding and decoding. Since their realizations should be completely

transparent to the OS and application layer, these functions should

reside in the flash memory controller chip. In selection-based enu-

merative coding, the computational complexity is dominated by the

calculations of different combinations [i.e.,

n i

].

Instead

of

on-the-

fly calculation, once we decide the value of n, we directly store the

value of all the

n i

s

in

on-chip

memory.

Regarding

data

compression,

we consider the popular LZ compression algorithm. To evaluate the

real silicon cost, we carried out ASIC design using Synopsys tool

set at 65-nm technology node. Tables I and II list the synthesis

results for implementing selection-based enumerative coding and

LZ compression/decompression with the target throughput of 1 GB/s,

which translates to about 8-μs latency for a 8-kB page data. Our

experiments with sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash memory chips show

that the memory programming latency is about 1.45 ms and 121 μs

for upper and lower page, respectively, and memory sensing latency

is about 55 and 41 μs for upper and lower page, respectively.

In addition, it takes 40 μs to transfer a 8-kB page between the con-

troller and memory chip. Therefore, the use of the proposed design

solution only induces very small overall access latency overhead.

The results also show that, even targeting at 1-GB/s throughput, the

incurred silicon implementation cost is not significant.

V. CONCLUSION
Under the compression and mapping design framework for improving flash memory P/E cycling endurance, this brief presents a selection-based enumerative coding solution to implement the mapping function to fully exploit the data dependency of memory cell damage. In addition, we present a scheme to more accurately measure

the data dependency of memory cell damage and quantify the cycling endurance improvement. Using commercial sub-22-nm MLC NAND flash memory chips, we carried out extensive experiments, and the results show that, with the data compression ratio of 1.5:1, the proposed design solution can improve the P/E cycling endurance by 25% compared with the state-of-the-art mapping design solution and 50% compared with the conventional practice without using any compression and mapping data manipulation. In addition, its practical implementation feasibility has been successfully demonstrated with ASIC design at the 65-nm technology node.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10x-extendedlifetime 76%-reduced solid-state drives (SSDs) with error-prediction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in Proc. IEEE Int. SolidState Circuits Conf., 2012, pp. 424–426.
[2] Z. Wang, M. Karpovsky, and A. Joshi, “Nonlinear multi-error correction codes for reliable MLC NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 1221–1234, Jul. 2012.
[3] C. Yang, Y. Emre, and C. Chakrabarti, “Product code schemes for error correction in MLC NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2302–2314, Dec. 2012.
[4] M.-C. Yang, Y.-H. Chang, C.-W. Tsao, and P.-C. Huang, “New ERA: New efficient reliability-aware wear leveling for endurance enhancement of flash storage devices,” in Proc. 50th Annu. Design Autom. Conf., 2013, pp. 1–6.
[5] F. Chen, T. Luo, and X. Zhang, “CAFTL: A content-aware flash translation layer enhancing the lifespan of flash memory based solid state drives,” in Proc. 9th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2011.
[6] Y. Cai, E. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory: Measurement characterization, and analysis,” in Proc. Design, Autom., Test Eur., 2012, pp. 521–526.
[7] A. Jagmohan, M. Franceschini, L. Lastras-Montano, and J. Karidis, “Adaptive endurance coding for NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM Workshops, Dec. 2010, pp. 1841–1845.
[8] T. M. Cover, “Enumerative source encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 73–77, Jan. 1973.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

