578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

A Dominating Error Region Strategy for Improving the Bit-Flipping LDPC Decoder of SSDs
Yupeng Hu, Member, IEEE, Shun Song, Sheng Xiao, Quan Xu, Nong Xiao, and Zheng Qin

Abstract—This brief presents a dominating error region strategy (DERS) that improves the bit-flipping (BF) low-density parity-check decoder for solid-state drives. With the help of the DERS, the state-of-the-art BF decoding algorithms achieve better error correction performance while taking less iterations. Specifically, the DERS provides solutions for restricting the occurrences of an even number of flipped bits and bit-error propagations, both of which are intrinsic problems to current BF decoding algorithms. The DERS can be implemented with a simple circuitry and serve as a fine-tuning technique for the decoding reliability–performance tradeoff. In this brief, the DERS is evaluated with numerical analysis and computer simulations.
Index Terms—Convergence, error correction, low-density parity check (LDPC), NAND Flash memory, solid-state drive (SSD).
I. INTRODUCTION
R EPLACING hard disk drives with NAND Flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs) is an emerging trend in modern storage system applications. SSD vendors are working toward cost reduction techniques that lead to higher storage density, from single-level cell (SLC) to multilevel cell (MLC) and to trinary-level cell. However, NAND Flash memory cells are prone to random bit errors influenced by various underlying physical factors [1], [2]. The probability of bit errors grows with the increment of the storage density. For instance, the raw bit error rate (RBER) of the MLC Flash memory is at least two orders of magnitude worse than that of the SLC Flash memory [3]. The growing demands of SSD error correction techniques have attracted a plethora of research efforts on constructions of strong error correction codes (ECCs), such
Manuscript received November 16, 2014; accepted January 13, 2015. Date of publication February 27, 2015; date of current version May 29, 2015. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61433019, U1435217, 61300218, 61300217, 61232003, 61472131, and 61272546. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor J. G. Delgado-Frias.
Y. Hu is with the College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China, and also with the State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: yphu@hnu.edu.cn).
S. Song, S. Xiao, and Z. Qin are with the College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China (e-mail: S1224W116@hnu.edu.cn; xiaosheng@hnu.edu.cn; zqin@hnu.edu.cn).
Q. Xu is with the School of Engineering and Mathematical Sciences, City University London, London EC1V 0HB, U.K. (e-mail: Quan.Xu.1@city.ac.uk).
N. Xiao is with the State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: xiao-n@vip.sina.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this brief are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2015.2407732

as linear Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem [4], Reed–Solomon (RS) [5], and powerful low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [6].
Due to the capacity-approaching ability in the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, a considerable number of LDPC decoding algorithms have been applied to high-density SSDs to provide advanced error correction with limited ECC code space. The existing LDPC decoding algorithms generally fall into two categories: soft-decision algorithms and harddecision algorithms. Soft-decision decoding algorithms (e.g., sum–product, min–sum, and their variants) for LDPC codes can achieve excellent error correction performance but suffer from severe read latency and high implementation complexity [6]. Hard-decision decoding algorithms (e.g., bit-flipping (BF) [7]) are relatively weak in error correction and easy to implement. Practically, SSDs prefer to utilize BF algorithms to correct sparse random bit errors in the early days [6].
In recent years, there has been growing interest in the study of hard-decision algorithms since vendors usually only provide hard-decision decoding information because of the increasing hardware design complexity and high-throughput requirements. As a kind of well-known hard-decision decoding method, BF algorithms have received considerable attention for their simplicity and silicon efficiency [7]. The authors in [8] presented a parallel implementation framework for various weighted BF (WBF) algorithms to accelerate the rate of convergence. Based on a simple gradient descent formulation, the authors in [9] proposed a gradient descent BF (GDBF) algorithm for further improving the performance of WBF. In [10], a novel BF (NBF) algorithm was proposed to avoid the dedicated global search operations at the cost of global count and BF operations.
Nevertheless, various BF algorithms inevitably suffer from two inherent shortcomings, that is, even number of flipped bits, i.e., an even number of flipped bits will make the parity bit appear correct although the data are erroneous, as well as biterror propagation, i.e., an incorrectly flipped bit may induce a chain reaction to mistakenly flip other related data bits. These two inherent weaknesses lead to extra decoding iterations and even decoding failures.
In this brief, we present a simple dominating error region strategy (DERS) that helps existing BF decoders overcome the two shortcomings mentioned above. Instead of performing the conventional global count and search operations, the DERS focuses on a narrow dominating error region in the AWGN channel where the random bit errors most likely appear. In this way, the DERS substantially improves the performance of existing BF decoders by obviating the potential disturbance

1549-7747 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licensSeede uhsttep:li/m/witwedwt.oie: eYeo.onrsge/ipUunbilvic. aDtoiownnsl_osatdaenddaorndsJ/upnuebl2ic4a,2ti0o2n6s/aritg1h6t:s4/i8n:0d8exU.hTtCmflrofomr mIEoErEe Xinpfloorrme.atRioens.trictions apply.

HU et al.: DERS FOR IMPROVING THE BF LDPC DECODER OF SSDs

579

Fig. 1. Structure of a NAND Flash memory array.

Fig. 3. Proportion of bit errors distributed in dominating error region (−q, q) versus q when the RBER is about 0.01.

example to illustrate our technique. We can easily extend the

analysis for our technique to any other N -level M -read Flash

memory and any other noise models with known conditional

distributions.

NAND Flash memory cells mainly suffer from two kinds of

errors: write errors and retention errors [3]. Most write errors

are caused by cells with threshold voltage higher than intended,

which is a result of program disturbances and noises, whereas

retention errors are dominated by cells with lower threshold

Fig. 2. Channel model and dominating error region. Channel model for a four-level MLC with threshold voltages modeled as Gaussians with the same variance. Ten distinct quantization regions are shown for nine reads.

voltage than intended. Fig. 2 illustrates the two error sources: write errors mainly correspond to the tail region at the high threshold voltage side, whereas retention errors correspond to

of irrelevant bits in decoding procedure. Moreover, the DERS is easy to be implemented as a fine-tuning technique for the decoding reliability–performance tradeoff. It only takes a very small number of logic gates to implement the DERS in hardware. Our theoretical analysis shows that the range of the dominating region could be found by studying the maximum mutual information (MMI). The experimental results show that the DERS can help the state-of-the-art BF algorithms achieve better error correction performance while allowing them to take less iterations.

the tail region at the low threshold voltage side. In Fig. 2, their union regions between the two dashed lines (i.e., (−q3, −q2), (−q1, q1), and (q2, q3)) are the dominating error regions where most random bit errors would appear.
In this brief, we constrain the quantization problem to a single parameter q through selecting thresholds so that the three dominating error regions in Fig. 2 have the same size 2q and are centered on the natural hard-decoding threshold voltages. The maximal value of q, which depends on the mean value and variance of the channel model, could be larger than 1. However, in this brief, we focus on the value range between 0 and 1 for

II. DERS

q. Fig. 3 plots the proportion of the random bit errors existing in the dominating error regions for the four-month data when

A. NAND Flash Channel and Dominating Error Region

the RBER is equal to 0.01. Note that the value of the RBER

Fig. 1 shows the structure of NAND Flash memory cells. To store information, a specific amount of charge (electrons) is applied to the floating gate (FG). The amount of charge on the FG determines what value the cell holds (e.g., 00, 01, 11, or 10, as shown in Fig. 2). To read a cell, the charge level written to the FG is detected by placing a specified wordline voltage across the control gate (CG) and measuring the transistor drain

indicates that it is the later period of SSD’s lifetime [1]. As can be seen, the dominating error regions contain most bit errors during the SSD’s lifetime. When q increases, which indicates a wider range, a higher proportion of errors would appear in the dominating error region. In addition, more bit errors will appear outside of the dominating error region as the RBER increases with the same q.

current on the bitline. The wordline voltage that is required to turn on a particular transistor is called the threshold voltage,

B. Choosing the Optimal q

which can vary from cell to cell for various reasons [11].

Instead of completely relying on experimental results to esti-

Generally, the threshold voltages of NAND Flash memory mate the optimal q, we propose an effective analytical method

are modeled by the Gaussian mixture model. Fig. 2 shows to obtain a close to optimal value of q by analyzing the MMI.

the channel model for four-level MLC NAND Flash memory Moreover, we verify the analytical results through experimental

with the threshold voltages modeled as AWGN of the same methods.

variance. In recent years, several other channel models have a) Analysis of MMI: This section elaborates on how to

been proposed, such as the theoretical Flash channel model obtain the optimal q with mutual information. Here, we place an

proposed in [11] and the phenomenological model in [12]. emphasis on quantizing MLC threshold voltage to ten distinct

Without loss of generality, in this brief, we use the four-level regions with nine reads, as depicted in Fig. 2. Notice that more

MLC with nine reads under AWGN (shown in Fig. 2) as an accurate values of q could be achieved via much more reads,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:48:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

Fig. 5. Decoding failure rate versus q under different RBERs.

Fig. 4. Quantization model for 4-MLC with nine reads.

whereas in this brief, we choose nine reads with regard to the accuracy–latency tradeoff.
As depicted in Fig. 4, the quantization model includes the input X ∈ {00, 01, 11, 10} and the output Y ∈ {00, ea1, ea2, 01, eb1, eb2, 11, ec1, ec2, 10}. Let H be the entropy function [11], the mutual information I(X; Y ) will be

Fig. 6. Interrelation between mutual information and experimental decoding failure rate with varying q when the RBER is set to 0.01.

I(X; Y )

= H p11 + p21 + p24 + p14 , p12 + p22 + p23 + p13

4

4

p13 + p23 + p22 + p12 , p14 + p24 + p21 + p11

4

4

e1a1 + e2a1 + e2c2 +e1c2 , e1a2 + e2a2 +e2c1 +e1c1

4

4

e1b1 + e2b1 + e2b2 +e1b2 , e1b2 + e2b2 + e2b1 +e1b1

4

4

e1c1 +e2c1 +e2a2 +e1a2 , e1c2 +e2c2 +e2a1 +e1a1

4

4

−

1 2

×

[H(p11, e1a1, e1a2, p12, e1b1, e1b2, p13, e1c1

e1c2, p14) + H(p21, e2a1, e2a2, p22, e2b1

e2b2, p23, e2c1, e2c2, p24) ]

(1)

√ w√here p11 = F (((tha −q)− Esa)/ N0/2)√, p1a1 = F ((tha −
Esa)/ N0/2)−√p11, p21 = F (((tha −q)− Esb)/ N0/2), p2a1 = F ((tha − Esb)/ N0/2) − p11, and so forth. tha denotes the original hard-decision threshold voltage betwee√n status “√00” and “01,” N0/2 is the common variance, and Esa and Esb are the means.
Since the mutual information I(X; Y ) measures the information that X and Y share, it is possible to achieve the least uncertainty about X if we are able to get MMI. Since I(X; Y ) is a function of variable q after substituting the above parameters with q, we may deduce an optimal q by taking the derivation of (1). The optimal q can be derived via dI/dq = 0.

b) Experimental Verification: To verify the above analytical method for q, without loss of generality, we perform simulations by choosing two typical sparse parity-check matrix with small column weights (3 and 5), both of which require a simple circuit implementation of decoder. Experimental results under different RBERs are shown in Figs. 5 and 6.
Fig. 5 illustrates the impact of different values of the parameter q on the possibility of decoding the codeword unsuccessfully under different RBERs. In the extensive experiments, we check whether the decoding procedure fails or not by checking the syndrome of the LDPC decoder after the decoding procedure. As shown in Fig. 5, selecting an appropriate q is the key to reduce the decoding failure rate. In other words, by choosing an appropriate q, it is possible to exclude a large amount of validated data bits from decoding and therefore avoid their potential disturbance.
Fig. 6 further reveals the interrelation between mutual information (right Y -axis) and decoding failure rate (left Y -axis) with varying q when the RBER is equal to 0.01. W3 and W5 each denotes a unique column weight, i.e., 3 and 5, respectively. The experimental results show that the value of q deduced from MMI is nearly equal to the optimal value for the realistic lowest failure rate of decoding. For example, in Fig. 6, for DERS-W5, when q is equal to 0.5 and 0.6, which denotes the optimal value for numerical MI and realistic decoding failure rate, respectively, there is only a slight difference between the two corresponding decoding failure rates (roughly 0.85 and 0.83). Therefore, the analytical results are consistent with the realistic experimental results with regard to the optimal q.

It is worth emphasizing that although the formula in (1) may not be a standard quasi-concave function as q changes, it is a con-

C. Algorithm Flow Diagram

tinuous and smooth function, as well as locally quasi-concave The DERS can coexist with a number of state-of-the-art BF in the range of our interest (i.e., q ∈ [0, 1]), as shown in Fig. 6. hard-decision algorithms. To compare with the latest work,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:48:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: DERS FOR IMPROVING THE BF LDPC DECODER OF SSDs

581

Fig. 7. Algorithm flow diagram of the proposed DERS.

Fig. 9. Comparisons of uncorrectable bit error rates (after decoding) when the column weight is set to 5.

Fig. 8. Circuit schematic of the DERS in the LDPC coding framework of the SSD. The key modules are shown in the decoder.

0, respectively. The logic resources utilization of the DERS is merely about 0.03% of the total utilization of the original BF LDPC decoder.

Fig. 7 depicts the algorithm flow diagram for the DERS based on the NBF in [10]. The key is to use q to guide the iteration operations (in the dashed rectangle) on region (−q, q). As shown in Fig. 7, the DERS replaces the conventional operations of counting the number of failed parity checks (denoted by Uik at the kth iteration) and searching the largest value for all bits by dealing with a small part of bits. Except for the generation of parity matrix and syndrome in the beginning, these irrelevant data bits will never be involved in the iteration process. Therefore, a carefully chosen q can be used to balance the decoding latency and the error correction performance.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS
This section presents the simulation results of the DERS used with NBF [10] and GDBF [9]. DERS/NBF and DERS/GDBF stand for the coexistence of the DERS with NBF and GDBF, respectively. In the experiments, we constructed two code-rate9/10, length-4-kB regular QC-PEG-LDPC codes with different column weights of 3 and 5, respectively. q is set in the range of [0.4, 0.6] according to Figs. 5 and 6, and the mean values of the two Gaussian distributions in the channel model are set to 1 and 3. The maximum number of iterations is set to 100.

The RBER is set in the range between 0.002 and 0.01, which

D. Hardware Implementation and Circuit Complexity
The DERS will be integrated into the BF LDPC decoder as part of the Flash controller in the FPGA, as shown in Fig. 8. The bits readout from Flash memory consist of two parts, i.e., the ADC converted threshold voltage Vth routed to the DERS, as well as the value/codeword (two bits per read for MLC) of cells delivered to the LDPC decoder. As seen, the key logic

is the typical RBER value range in the late lifetime of NAND Flash memory. When the RBER falls into this range, the ECC module becomes critical in ensuring the reliability of the SSD. All decoding parameters of the DERS are set to be the same as NBF and GDBF for fair comparisons.
A. Error Correction Capability

modules of the DERS are an array of simple comparators, i.e., The DERS can reduce the occurrences of an even number

CMP1–CMP3, which are designed to output a flag bit (0 or 1) of flipped bits and therefore improve error correction capability

according to which voltage region the Vth belongs to. Thus, for BF decoding algorithms. Generally speaking, an even numthe DERS will output flags (having the same length as the ber of flipped bits are more likely to appear when more data

codeword) to the information storage module to benefit the BF bits are sent into decoding iterations. The DERS can exclude a

iterations. According to Fig. 2, CMP1 and CMP3 are dedicated to identify the “00↔01” or “11↔10”-errors by judging whether Vth belong to the region (−q3, −q2) or (q2, q3). If so, the OR gate in the DERS will output “1,” which indicates that the

large amount of data bits that are hard-decision correct from further participating in the decoding process. Subsequently, the occurrences of an even number of flipped bits are greatly reduced.

second bit of the corresponding codeword needs to be delivered Figs. 9 and 10 compare the statistical uncorrectable bit

to the shift logic module for BF iterations; otherwise, it will error rates for two approaches with/without DERS. Clearly,

output “0,” which indicates that the second bit is unnecessary coexisting with other BF decoders, the DERS can help them

to be involved in the iterations. On the other hand, CMP2 is dedicated to identify the “01↔11”-errors by judging whether Vth belongs to region (−q1, q1) and, subsequently, if the first bit should be involved in the iterations.

achieve a lower uncorrectable bit error rate than the two original methods without DERS. As shown in Fig. 9, both DERS/NBFW5 and DERS/GDBF-W5 significantly outperform NBF-W5 and GDBF-W5 in the uncorrectable error rate, although there

To quantitatively depict the hardware complexity of the is a steep decline when the RBER is very low, for example,

DERS module, we use Verilog to model the proposed circuits, DERS/GDBF-W5 can already correct all error bits even if

as shown in Fig. 8. The DERS module is synthesized with the RBER reaches 0.003 or so. The benefit of the DERS is

Altera 5SGXEA7H3F35C3 of Stratix V family. The number of even more remarkable when the column weight is 3, as shown

adaptive logic modules and registers of the DERS is 10 and in Fig. 10. In other words, the DERS helps the BF decoder

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:48:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 62, NO. 6, JUNE 2015

C. Decoding Throughput

Fig. 10. Comparisons of uncorrectable bit error rates when the column weight is set to 3.

By neglecting those already validated data bits, the DERS not only reduces the number of decoding iterations but also decreases the number of clock cycles per decoding iteration. We performed the application-specified integrated circuit design for the DERS and LDPC decoder by using Synopsys 65-nm CMOS library for placement and routing, and PrimeTime for static timing. The decoding throughput in Table I is estimated by postlayout simulations based on QC-PEG-LDPC with a parallel factor of 32 and a clock frequency of 250 MHz. Either DERS/NBF or DERS/GDBF needs roughly 10 and 16 clock cycles per decoding iteration with a decoding matrix column weight of 3, respectively. In comparison, the original NBF needs about 15 clock cycles per decoding iteration, and GDBF takes more clock cycles (about 24) per decoding iteration because of the time-consuming floating-point calculations. As shown in Table I, the DERS can improve the decoding throughput by 30%–48%.

Fig. 11. Reduction of iterations versus RBER.
TABLE I COMPARISONS OF DECODING THROUGHPUT (MB/s)

IV. CONCLUSION
In this brief, we have presented a DERS that can be easily integrated into various existing BF decoders and serve as a fine-tuning technique to gain considerable reductions of the uncorrectable error bit rate and the number of decoding iterations and thus help decoders gain substantial improvements in throughput.

determine which bit should be flipped even if the column weight is very small.
B. Reduction of Decoding Iterations
The DERS helps improve the convergence rate of the BF decoding algorithms. By excluding a large number of data bits that are hard-decision correct from further decoding iterations, the DERS assures that these proved-to-be-correct data bits will never be swing-flipped or mistakenly flipped by the incorrect bit decoding decisions. As a result, the decoder becomes more efficient in each iteration and converges faster.
Fig. 11 shows that the DERS substantially reduces the number of decoding iterations. Particularly, the reduction of iterations reaches a peak when the RBER approaches to 0.007 and 0.005 for column weights of 5 and 3, respectively. For example, DERS/NBF-W3 saves almost 60 iterations to reach the same accuracy as NBF-W3 reaches the maximal number of iterations when q is 0.005. Meanwhile, the reduction of decoding failure rate nearly has the same variation tendency as the reduction of iterations in Fig. 11, but we choose to skip the discussions of this effect due to the page limit. When the DERS is used to handle a massive amount of data, the benefits of reductions on the number of iterations and the decoding failure rate will be even more remarkable.

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Error patterns in MLC NAND Flash memory: Measurement, characterization, and analysis,” in Proc. DATE, Mar. 2012, pp. 521–526.
[2] S. L. G. Dong and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND Flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010.
[3] H. Sun, P. Grayson, and B. Wood, “Quantifying reliability of solid-state storage from multiple aspects,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop SNAPI, May 2011, pp. 1–8.
[4] S. Li and T. Zhang, “Improving multi-level NAND Flash memory storage reliability using concatenated BCH-TCM coding,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1412–1420, Oct. 2010.
[5] C. Yang, Y. Emre, and C. Chakrabarti, “Product code schemes for error correction in MLC NAND Flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2302–2314, Dec. 2012.
[6] K. Zhao et al., “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives.” in Proc. FAST, 2013, pp. 243–256.
[7] X. Wu et al., “New insights into weighted bit-flipping decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2177–2180, Aug. 2009.
[8] X. Wu et al., “Towards understanding weighted bit-flipping decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2007, pp. 1666–1670.
[9] T. Wadayama et al., “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[10] W. Z. Zhao, K. Zhao, Q. B. Chen, M. J. Lv, and Z. X. Hou, “A novel bitflipping LDPC decoder for solid-state data storage,” Appl. Mech. Mater., vol. 513, pp. 2094–2098, Feb. 2014.
[11] J. Wang et al., “Enhanced precision through multiple reads for LDPC decoding in Flash memories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, May 2014.
[12] J. Moon et al., “Statistical characterization of noise and interference in NAND Flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2153–2164, Aug. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:48:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

