Analyzing the Finite-Length Performance of Generalized LDPC Codes
Pablo M. Olmos∗, David G. M. Mitchell†, and Daniel J. Costello, Jr.† ∗Signal Theory and Communications Dept., University of Carlos III in Madrid, Spain, olmos@tsc.uc3m.es †Dept. of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA, {david.mitchell, costello.2}@nd.edu

Abstract—In this paper, we analyze the performance of finitelength generalized LDPC (GLDPC) block codes constructed from protographs when transmission takes place over the binary erasure channel (BEC). A generalized peeling decoder is proposed and we derive a system of differential equations that gives the expected evolution of the graph degree distribution during decoding. We then show that the finite-length performance of a GLDPC code can be estimated by means of a simple scaling law, where a single scaling parameter represents the finite-length properties of the code. We also show that, as we consider stronger component codes, both the asymptotic threshold and the finitelength scaling parameter are improved.
Index Terms—generalized LDPC codes, finite-length performance analysis, codes on graphs
I. INTRODUCTION
Generalized LDPC (GLDPC) block codes were first proposed by Tanner [1]. In this construction, more complicated constraints than a single parity-check (SPC) are permitted. A constraint node can represent an arbitrary linear block code, which we refer to as the component code associated with the constraint node. On the binary erasure channel (BEC), we can characterize each constraint node of a GLDPC code graph by a list of input erasure patterns that can be corrected by the associated component code. For example, a constraint node based on a (7,4) Hamming code with maximum likelihood (ML) decoding can decode all erasure patterns with one and two erasures and some erasure patterns with three erasures. On the contrary, an SPC node can only decode erasure patterns with one erasure. GLDPC block codes possess many desirable features, such as large minimum distance [2] and good iterative decoding performance [3]. While the set of GLDPC code families analyzed to date is large, see, e.g., [2]–[6], comparisons between different constructions are typically based on minimum distance and/or iterative decoding threshold. In this paper, we analyze the finite-length performance of GLDPC codes on the BEC.
For binary LDPC block codes, a finite-length performance analysis on the BEC was proposed in [7], where the authors consider an equivalent formulation to belief propagation decoding called the peeling decoder (PD). The PD iteratively removes variable nodes whose value is known from the Tanner graph. The decoding process yields a sequence of graphs
This work was partially supported by NSF Grant CCF-1161754, by Spanish Government (projects ’COMONSENS’, id. CSD2008-00010, ’ALCIT’, id. TEC2012-38800-C03-01) and Comunidad de Madrid (project ’CASI-CAMCM’, id. S2013/ICE-2845).

whose statistics define both the asymptotic and finite-length

properties of the code [7].

In this paper, we extend the analysis in [7] to GLDPC

block codes constructed from protographs [6]. We focus on

protograph-based code ensembles since they possess several

advantages, including smaller decoder memory requirements

due to the simplified graph representation and the ability

to combine low error floors and good thresholds [8], [9].

Given the list of erasure patterns that can be decoded at

each constraint node, we define a generalized peeling decoder

(GPD). We show that the GPD error probability for a finite-

length GLDPC code can be estimated from the statistics of

the residual graph during the decoding process. In particular,

we derive a system of differential equations that represents the

expected graph evolution during the GPD process.

The expected graph evolution can be used both to find

the iterative decoding threshold and to investigate the finite-

length scaling behavior of GLDPC block codes. Using a

(2, 7)-regular protograph as an example, we show that the

waterfall performance of the associated finite-length GLDPC

code ensemble on the BEC can be accurately estimated by a

scaling law (SL) similar to the one proposed in [7] for (l, r)-

regular LDPC block code ensembles. The SL is a function of the channel parameter , the GPD threshold ∗, the code

length n, and a scaling parameter that we denote by α, and

we s√how as α n(

that ∗−

the error rate of a GLDPC code goes to zero ) → ∞. We further show that, as we consider

stronger component codes, both the GPD threshold and the

scaling parameter α improve. Since the analysis directly provides both the threshold ∗ and a quantity proportional to

α, the results allow for GLDPC block code optimization from

both an asymptotic and a finite-length point of view.

II. PROTOGRAPH-BASED GLDPC BLOCK CODES
We represent a GLDPC block code by an m × n binary matrix1 H and its corresponding Tanner graph with n variable nodes and m constraint nodes. Each constraint node is associated with a component code. We consider a class of GLDPC block codes with the following properties:
1) Following [8], H is generated using a c × b protograph base matrix B with lifting factor M . Hence, m = M c and n = M b.

1We denote vectors and matrices by d = (d1, d2, . . . , dn) and M,

respectively. A vector with all zeros except for a single 1 at position j is

denoted by 0j . |d| =

n i=1

di

denotes

the

sum

of

all

entries

in

d.

978-1-4673-7704-1/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

2683

ISIT 2015

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14

for d ∈ Fv and c ∈ F c, where Ld(0) (Rc(0)) is the number of variable (constraint) nodes of type d(c) after GPD
initialization.

Fig. 1. A (2, 7)-regular protograph with edge labeling.

2) All constraint nodes in H that are copies of a particular constraint node in B are characterized by the same component code.
Protograph-based codes are a class of multi-edge type
LDPC codes. To define the degree distribution (DD), we label each edge in B connecting a different pair of nodes from 1 to e. For example, in Fig. 1 we show the Tanner graph associated with the base matrix of a (2, 7)-regular GLDPC code. Edges are labelled from 1 to e = 14. In the Tanner graph of H, we say that a particular edge is of type j, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , e}, if it connects a variable node and a constraint node that are copies of the two nodes that edge j connects in B. Also, we define the type of a variable node by a vector d = (d1, . . . , de), where dj ∈ N0 represents the number of edges of type j connected to this variable node. Similarly, for a constraint node, we define its type by a vector c. Let Ld (Rc) represent the number of variable (constraint) nodes of type d (c). We denote the set of variable (constraint) node types in the graph by Fv (Fc).
III. TRANSMISSION OVER THE BEC AND THE GPD
The PD is used to analyze the finite-length performance of
binary LDPC block codes over the BEC [7]. The PD iteratively
removes a degree-one check node in the graph along with
the variable node attached to it and all edges connected to
these two nodes. The PD is initialized by removing from the Tanner graph of H all variable nodes correctly received after transmission. In this paper, we define an extension to the PD
referred to as the generalized peeling decoder (GPD).

A. GPD Initialization
The GPD is initialized as the PD algorithm: every variable node of H and its attached edges are removed from the graph with probability (1 − ). Note that, after such an initialization, the residual graph contains constraint nodes with types that are not included in Fc; however, the set of variable node types Fv remains the same. Given a constraint node of type c, define D(c) as the set of all possible constraint node types that might appear in the graph when edges are removed from a constraint node of type c (assume c ∈ D(c)). The extended set of all possible constraint node types in the residual graph after the GPD initialization is then F c = c∈Fc D(c). For example, in the (2, 7)-regular protograph in Fig. 1, we have two constraint node types and, from each one, a set of 27 = 128 types can be found in the residual graph.
According to the above definitions, the expected DD after
initialization can be expressed as follows:

E[Ld(0)] = Ld, E[Rc(0)] =

Rq |c|(1 − )|q|−|c|

q∈Fc : c∈D(q)

(1)

B. Decodable constraint nodes and the GPD

As discussed in Section II, each constraint node in the

protograph B is associated with a component code. Let Cc be the component code associated with the constraint node in B

of type c ∈ Fc. By extension, each constraint node in the graph H is associated with a component code according to its type.

After the GPD initialization, the type of a given constraint

node can be modified from c to c , where |c | < |c|. We

say that c is the input erasure pattern seen by the component

code Cc. The question now is if we are able to recover the |c |

variables still connected to the constraint node by decoding

the component code Cc using a given decoding algorithm, for

instance ML decoding. In general, for each component code

Cc, only a subset of input erasure patterns can be decoded. This subset is denoted by A(c) ⊂ D(c). If a constraint node

is of type c ∈ A(c), then we say it is a decodable constraint

node and c is a decodable constraint node type.

A

T=.he∪cse∈tFoc Af a(cll).deTchoedaGbPleDcoalngsotrraitihnmt niosdaentyepxetesnissiognivoefn

by the

PD from binary LDPC codes to binary GLDPC codes. After

initialization, the GPD choses at random from the graph one

decodable constraint node. This constraint node, all connected

variable nodes, and all attached edges are then removed from

the graph. The GPD continues in this way until there are no

further constraint nodes that can be removed from the graph,

which corresponds to a decoding failure, or until there are

no variable nodes left in the graph, which corresponds to

successful decoding.

IV. EXPECTED GRAPH EVOLUTION

Our goal is to analyze the statistical evolution of the DD of the residual graph as the GPD iterates. Based on this analysis we can characterize the asymptotic and finite-length properties of the GLDPC code ensemble [7]. We define the normalized DD as follows

τ =. n ,

rc(τ )

=.

Rc(τ n

)

,

ld(τ )

=.

Ld(τ n

)

,

(2)

where is the GPD iteration index, Rc(τ ) (Ld(τ )) is the number of constraint (variable) nodes in the graph of type c(d) at time τ , and n is the code length. Note that τ ∈ [0, ). Following the methodology developed in [7] to analyze the performance of finite-length LDPC block codes, we can investigate the finite-length performance of GLDPC codes by analyzing the statistical evolution of the DD in (2) during the decoding process. As shown in [7], the expected value of rc(τ ) and ld(τ ), denoted by ˆld(τ ) and rˆc(τ ), can be computed using following system of differential equations:

∂ˆld(τ ) ∂τ

=E

Ld(τ

+

1 n

)

−

Ld(τ )

{ˆld(τ ), rˆc(τ )}d∈Fv,c∈Fc

,

(3)

∂rˆc(τ ) ∂τ

=E

Rc(τ

+

1 n

)

−

Rc(τ )

{ˆld(τ ),

rˆc(τ )}d∈Fv,c∈Fc

.

(4)

2684
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Hence the derivative of rˆc(τ ) w.r.t. τ in (4) can be evaluated

by computing the variation in the number of constraint nodes

of type c with a GPD iteration if the DD at time τ is

{ˆld(τ ), rˆc is unique

(τ )}d∈Fv,c∈Fc . Further, and, with probability 1

the solution − O(e−√n),

to (3) and (4) any particular

realization of the normalized DD in (2) deviates from its mean by a factor of less than n−1/6 for the initial conditions

d!j

... j k ...

q

c

ˆld(0) = E[Ld( = 0)]/n and rˆc(0) = E[Rc( = 0)]/n

given in (1) [7]. The computation of the expectations in (3) and (4) is detailed in Section IV-A. The GPD threshold is given by the maximum value of for which the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes

aˆ(τ ) =. rˆc(τ )

(5)

c∈A

is positive for any τ ∈ aˆ(τ ) is the mean of the

[0, ). Based on random process

(5), a(τ )

w=.e

can say that c∈A rc(τ ).

The solution to (3) and (4) can be used to characterize the

asymptotic behavior, i.e., to compute the decoding threshold

of the ensemble, and also to determine the quantities needed

to assess the finite-length performance of the code. We define

as critical points as the points in time for which aˆ(τ ) has a

local minimum. The average (over the ensemble of codes)

error probability is dominated by the probability that the

process a(τ ) does not go to zero around the critical points

[7]. Therefore, we are interested in characterizing the critical

points and the value of aˆ(τ ) at those points in time.

A. Expected graph evolution in a single GPD iteration
Assume the graph DD in (2) at a particular time τ is known. Our aim in this section is to show how the expectations in (3) and (4) can be computed. The procedure is similar to that performed for protograph-based LDPC block code ensembles in [10]. For the GPD, we say that only decodable constraint nodes can be directly removed. Per GPD iteration, a decodable constraint node is directly removed from the graph along with the variable nodes connected to it and all the attached edges. When these edges are removed, a certain number of constraint nodes in the graph lose one edge2, so that the type of each one of these constraint nodes is modified, e.g., from c1 ∈ F c to c2 ∈ F c. In this case we say that a constraint node of type c1 is indirectly removed from the graph and a constraint node of type c2 is added to the graph (strictly speaking we have only changed the type of the constraint node). Note that decodable constraint nodes can be removed from the graph in either a direct way or in an indirect way.
1) Direct removal of constraint nodes: Decodable constraint nodes are directly removed from the graph with uniform probability. Hence, the probability that the type of the decodable constraint node removed at time τ is c ∈ A is Pc−(τ ) = rc(τ )/a(τ ).

Fig. 2. If the GPD removes the decodable constraint node of type q from the graph, then the type d→j variable node and the edges of type j and k are also removed. The constraint node of type c is indirectly removed and a constraint node of type c is added, where ci = ci for i = k and ck = ck −1.

2) Indirect removal of constraint nodes: To compute the expected number of constraint nodes of type c that are indi-
rectly removed from the graph, we first focus on a particular
scenario. Assume the GPD removes a decodable constraint node of type q ∈ A and the variable nodes connected to it. Now we want to compute the expected number Ec−,k,q(τ ) of constraint nodes of type c ∈ Fc that are indirectly removed from the graph because one edge of type k is removed, k ∈ [1, e]. This scenario is depicted in Fig. 2. It follows that





Ec−,k,q(τ ) =

ck rc(τ ) ek re(τ )

e

 

qj



j=1

d→ k j

+

qk

(dk→k

− 1) . 

e∈F c

j=k

Sketch of proof : qj is the number of variable nodes connected to the decodable constraint node by an edge of type j. The type3 of the variable nodes connected to these edges is denoted by d→j, where d→ k j is the number of edges of type k connected to such variable nodes. The term inside the parenthesis in Ec−,k,q(τ ) represents the total number of edges of type k that can be connected to a type c constraint node,
while the first term represents the probability that each one of these edges is connected to a type c constraint node.
Finally, the expected number of constraint nodes of type c indirectly removed after a GPD iteration is obtained by averaging Ec−,k,q(τ ) over all decodable constraint nodes:

e

Ec−(τ ) =

Pq−(τ )

Ec−,k,q(τ ) .

(6)

q∈A

k=1

3) Adding new constraint node types: As discussed above,
for every edge indirectly removed from the graph, we add
to the graph a new constraint node of a different type. We now compute the expected number Ec+(τ ) of constraint nodes of type c that are created after a GPD iteration. Note that a constraint node of type c can only be created if a constraint node of type c + 0k, k = 1, . . . , e, is indirectly removed from the graph because the constraint node loses a type-k edge.
Using (6), it is easy to show that

Ec+(τ ) =

Pq−(τ )

q∈A

e
Ec−+0k,k,q(τ ) .
k=1

2We ignore the probability of double edges in the GLDPC code graph,

3By definition, there is only one variable node type d ∈ Fv such that

which is justified in the limit M → ∞.

dj > 0. This variable node type is precisely d→j .

2685
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4) Expected evolution in a single GPD update: Given the

preceding arguments, we can compute the expected evolution

of the number of constraint nodes of type c in the graph in

a single GPD update. For any constraint node type c ∈ Fc

such that c ∈/ A, the expected evolution is Ec+(τ ) − Ec−(τ ).

Accounting for decodable constraint nodes, any c ∈ A is also

directly removed with probability Pc−(τ ), and hence E[Rc(τ +

1 n

)

−

Rc(τ

)]

=

Ec+(τ

)

−

Ec−(τ

)

−

Pc−(τ

).

V. ANALYSIS OF (2, 7)-REGULAR GLDPC CODES

We now illustrate the results using the GLPDC code ensemble defined by the (2, 7)-regular protograph shown in Fig. 1. As examples, we analyze three different cases, where different component code scenarios are considered.

A. (7, 4) Hamming constraint nodes with ML decoding
First, we assume that a (7, 4) Hamming code with ML decoding is associated with each of the two constraint nodes. The design rate of this ensemble is R = 0.1429. All constraint node types with one or two erasures can be decoded, as well as some constraint node types with three erasures. Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes aˆ(τ ) versus the expected fraction of variable nodes vˆ(τ ) in the graph4 for different values. We also include a set of 10 simulated trajectories to demonstrate that they concentrate around aˆ(τ ). Note first that aˆ(τ ) has a single critical point at v(τ ∗) ≈ 0.43. Indeed, we can compute the threshold ∗ as the maximum value for which the critical point has value exactly zero. In this case we obtain ∗ ≈ 0.7025.
The finite-length error probability is dominated by the statistics of a(τ ) around τ ∗. Following [7], for each n and
pair, we can estimate the finite-length error rate as

PBlock ∼ Q

aˆ(τ ∗)

,

Var(a[τ ∗])

(7)

where aˆ(τ ∗) is the expected value of a(τ ) at τ ∗ and Var[a(τ ∗)]

represents the variance. In this paper, we use Monte Carlo simulation in order to estimate Var(a[τ ∗]) for a particular

(n, ) pair; however, in principle, this quantity can be obtained

from the covariance evolution system of differential equations

first presented in [7] for binary LDPC code ensembles. Also,

in [7] the authors showed that the ratio of the expected number

of degree-one constraint nodes to the critical point approximately scales as

αst√annd(ar∗d−dev),iawtihoenreatαthies

a scaling parameter that only depends on the DD. In our case,

simulated trajectories for a(τ ) suggest that the same scaling

holds and that the performance can be estimated as

PBlock ∼ Q

√ α n(

∗

−

)

.

(8)

After computing aˆ(τ ∗)/ Var(a(τ ∗)) for a given (n, ) pair, we estimate α by equating the arguments in (7) and (8). In this case, we obtained α = 1.8024. In Fig. 4 we plot the simulated performance versus (8), where we observe that the estimate is
very accurate for a sufficiently large lifting factor.

4vˆ(τ ) is computed as vˆ(τ ) =. d∈Fv ˆld(τ ).

ˆa(τ )

0.04 0.035
0.03 0.025
0.02 0.015
0.01 0.005
0 0

ǫ = 0.68 ǫ = 0.69 ǫ = 0.7 ǫ = 0.705
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
vˆ(τ )

Fig. 3. Evolution of the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes aˆ(τ ) for the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC code ensemble with (7, 4) Hamming component codes decoded using an ML decoder. Dotted curves represent simulated trajectories computed for = 0.69 with M = 4000 bits.

B. (7, 4) Hamming constraint nodes with suboptimal decoding

Assume now that a suboptimal (bounded distance) decoder is used at the constraint nodes in place of ML decoding. The suboptimal decoder is only able to decode erasure patterns up to two erased bits (recall the ML decoder is also able to decode a certain fraction of erasure patterns with three bits). In this case, the same analysis can be performed with a simple update of the list of decodable constraint node types. In Fig. 5(a) we plot the expected evolution of the fraction of decodable constraint nodes in the ensemble aˆ(τ ) for several values. Note that the the behavior of this decoder is also described by a single-critical point model; however, the use of a suboptimal decoder for the constraint nodes significantly decreases the decoding threshold to ∗ ≈ 0.5135 and reduces the finitelength scaling parameter to α = 1.6719. In Fig. 5(b), we compare the performance obtained by computer simulations with the estimated performance from (8), where we again note the accuracy of the estimate for large M .

100

Block error probability

−1
10

10−2

10−3

−4
10 0.67

0.68

0.69

0.7

ǫ

M = 500 M = 1000 M = 2000 M = 4000
0.71

Fig. 4. Simulated performance (solid lines) and estimated performance using (8) (dashed lines) for the the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC code ensemble with (7, 4) Hamming constraint nodes decoded using an ML decoder.

2686
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ˆa(τ )

0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01
0 0
100

ǫ = 0.49 ǫ = 0.5 ǫ = 0.51 ǫ = 0.52

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

vˆ(τ )

(a)

Block error probability

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4 0.48

0.49

0.5

0.51

ǫ

(b)

M = 500 M = 1000 M = 2000 M = 4000

0.52

0.53

Fig. 5. In (a), we show the evolution of the expected fraction of decodable constraint nodes aˆ(τ ) for the (2, 7)-regular GLDPC code ensemble with suboptimal decoding. In (b), we show the simulated performance (solid lines) and the estimated performance using (8) (dashed lines).

C. One (7, 4) Hamming and one SPC constraint node
In order to increase the code design rate we can construct GLDPC codes with a mixture of different constraint node types, potentially including some SPC nodes [6]. This approach provides a compromise between finite-length performance and code rate. For example, suppose that the left constraint node in Fig. 1 is a (7, 4) Hamming constraint node while the right constraint node is an SPC node. The code design rate in this case is increased to R = 0.4285. Suppose also we use the suboptimal decoder for the (7, 4) Hamming constraint node, as described in Section V-B. The analysis can be performed with a simple update to the list of decodable constraint node types, and the same behavior has been observed, i.e., a single critical point exists and it defines both the asymptotic and finite-length behavior of the ensemble. The threshold computed is ∗ ≈ 0.3625 and the scaling parameter is α = 1.5102. Note that, as we consider weaker constraints, decreasing α values are observed. This effect is also noted by computing the parameter γ = aˆ(τ ∗)/( ∗ − ) for each case. As discussed in [7], α is proportional to γ for
→ ∗. Hence, the higher the γ, the better the finite-length performance of the code. For the three cases considered, we obtain γ = 0.47, γ = 0.436, and γ = 0.26, respectively.

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have analyzed finite-length GLDPC block
codes constructed from protographs on the BEC. Based on the
DD of the GLDPC code, we derived a system of differential
equations that describes the expected graph evolution as the
GPD iterates. We then observed that the performance of the
code can be accurately predicted by a simple scaling law that depends on the channel parameter, the code length n, the GLDPC ensemble threshold ∗, and a scaling parameter α. Finally, we illustrated the approach with several simple cases.
One of the most interesting points about the analysis
of GLDPC codes over the BEC is that the only required
information about the component codes is a list of which
erasure patterns each component code can decode. For a given target rate R, we can optimize the base matrix and the lists of decodable erasure patterns to maximize the iterative decoding threshold, where we wish ∗ to be close to 1 − R, and to maximize the expected fraction aˆ(τ ∗) of decodable constraint nodes at the critical point to improve the finite-
length robustness of the code. A posteriori, the problem is to
find a set of block codes and decoders to use at the constraint
nodes that correct the desired lists of decodable patterns and
at the same time minimize rate loss and decoding complexity.
A future line of research will be to extend the present analysis
to spatially-coupled GLDPC code ensembles [11], [12].
REFERENCES
[1] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533 – 547, Sept. 1981.
[2] M. Lentmaier and K. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density paritycheck codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 3, pp. 248–250, Aug 1999.
[3] G. Liva, W. Ryan, and M. Chiani, “Quasi-cyclic generalized LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 56, pp. 49–57, January 2008.
[4] P. Vontobel and H.-A. Loeliger, “Irregular codes from regular graphs,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Laussane, Switzerland, pp. 284–, 2002.
[5] Paolini, E. and Fossorier, M.P.C. and Chiani, M., “Generalized and Doubly Generalized LDPC Codes With Random Component Codes for the Binary Erasure Channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, pp. 1651–1672, April 2010.
[6] S. Abu-Surra, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Enumerators for protograph-based ensembles of LDPC and generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, pp. 858–886, Feb. 2011.
[7] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 55, pp. 473 –498, Feb. 2009.
[8] J. Thorpe, “Low density parity check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” tech. rep., JPL IPN Progress Report 42-154, 2003.
[9] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacityapproaching protograph codes,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 27, pp. 876–888, August 2009.
[10] M. Stinner and P. Olmos, “Analyzing finite-length protograph-based spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Hawaii, USA, pp. 891–895, June 2014.
[11] M. Lentmaier and G. Fettweis, “On the thresholds of generalized LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings (ISIT), Austin, USA., pp. 709–713, June 2010.
[12] D. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. Costello, “On the minimum distance of generalized spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 1874–1878, July 2013.

2687
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

