Adaptive Error Correction Coding Scheme for Computations in the Noisy Min-Sum Decoder

Chu-Hsiang Huang Department of Electrical Engineering, UCLA
Los Angeles, California Email: seanhuang0522@ucla.edu

Yao Li Akamai Technologies, Inc.,
Pasadena, California Email: yli@akamai.com

Lara Dolecek Department of Electrical Engineering, UCLA
Los Angeles, California Email: dolecek@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract—With scaling of process technologies and increase in process variations, embedded memories will be inherently unreliable. In this paper, we propose redundancy-free adaptive error-correcting codes for the noisy min-sum decoder subject to memory errors. We consider the popular memory error model with a binary symmetric channel. We first revisit the density evolution analysis proposed by Balatsoukas-Stimming and Burg for the noisy min-sum decoder. Two important consequences of the density evolution analysis are: (a) after a large enough number of iterations, most of the messages have large magnitudes, and the residual errors are mostly from the sign bit flips due to memory failures, and (b) errors in the least significant bits in largemagnitude messages have a negligible effect on the residual error rate. We thus propose adaptive error-correcting codes to protect sign bits by least significant bits when the messages have large magnitudes. The proposed coding scheme does not require any further data storage (i.e., this code is redundancy-free). Density evolution analysis for the noisy min-sum decoder implementing the proposed coding scheme is derived, demonstrating that the proposed decoder achieves a residual error rate that is on the order of the square of the residual error rate achieved by the nominal min-sum decoder. Simulation results on the finite block length LDPC code also agree with this density evolution analysis.
Index Terms—Fault-tolerant computing, iterative decoders, error-correcting code, variability-aware computing.
I. INTRODUCTION Nanometer CMOS technologies are susceptible to a variety
of reliability issues. Popular approaches to enhance hardware
reliability, such as overdesigning and gaurdbanding, incur large
power consumption and are inefficient for current digital sys-
tems. A promising alternative is to develop algorithmic-based
robust systems tolerant to hardware errors [1]. Memory elements and flip-flops have been shown to be
the first point of failure in digital circuits; memory failure
rates are increasing due to the impact of shrinking dimensions,
high integration densities, lower operating voltages, etc. [2].
Theoretical analysis for fault-tolerant memory system design
was discussed in [3]. Techniques such as error correction coding
and data mapping were introduced to mitigate the effects of
memory cell errors, [4] and [5]. Recently, several important works have been devoted to iter-
ative decoders for modern channel codes on graphs under noisy
hardware, [6]–[9]. Density evolution analysis for the belief
propagation and min-sum decoders under different hardware
error models were studied in [10]–[12]. In this paper, we develop adaptive error-correcting codes
tailored for the noisy min-sum decoder for LDPC codes subject

to memory errors. We briefly review the LDPC codes and the noise-free min-sum decoder in Section II. In Section III, we first introduce the memory error model and summarize the density evolution analysis for the noisy min-sum decoder [10]. From the density evolution analysis, we observe that when the communication channel noise and hardware error rate are sufficiently small, most of the residual errors of the noisy decoder stem from flipped sign bits that are the result of memory failures. We also observe that the least significant bit (LSB) errors in large-magnitude messages have a negligible effect on the residual error rate. Based on the two observations, in Section IV, we propose redundancy-free adaptive error-correcting codes (i.e., no additional redundant memory cells are required) to reduce the residual error rate of the noisy min-sum decoder. In this paper, we refer to the noisy min-sum decoder implementing the proposed adaptive error-correcting codes as the robust minsum decoder. Density evolution analysis for the robust min-sum decoder is accompanied by numerical examples to illustrate the residual error rate reduction brought about by implementing the proposed error-correcting codes. The analysis shows that, when the communication noise and hardware error rate are sufficiently small, the robust min-sum decoder is able to achieve a residual error rate that is on the order of the square of the residual error rate achieved by the nominal min-sum decoder (that is cognizant of hardware errors but does not employ the additional coding scheme). Simulation results presented in Section V agree with the density evolution analysis and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed error-correcting codes on the noisy min-sum decoder for finite length LDPC codes. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we review the LDPC codes and the min-sum decoding algorithm of the noise-free min-sum decoder.
A. LDPC Codes
An LDPC code is a linear code that can be conveniently represented by a sparse bipartite graph. The bipartite graph is composed of variable nodes, check nodes, and edges each connecting a variable node to a check node. In a (dv, dc)-regular LDPC code, each variable is connected to dv check nodes, and each check node is connected to dc variable nodes.

978-1-4673-7704-1/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

1906

ISIT 2015

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Noise-Free Finite Precision Min-Sum Decoder

On the bipartite graph associated with an LDPC code, let Nv and Nc denote the nodes connected to the variable node v and to the check node c, respectively. Let yv be the decoder input at the variable node v, and xv ∈ {+1, −1} be the transmitted bit corresponding to the variable node v. Denote the noise-free messages sent in the th iteration by m˜ ( ). More specifically, m˜ v( ,)c denotes the message sent from variable node v to its incident check node c, while m˜ (c,v) denotes the message passed
from check node c to its incident variable node v. Note that for

min-sum decoders, a message is the proxy of the log-likelihood ratio of the transmitted bit corresponding to a variable node v.

For completeness, let us quickly summarize the main steps of

the noise-free min-sum decoder.

• (Initialization) At iteration = 0, each variable node v

sends

the

message

m˜ v(0,c)

=

ln

P (yv |xv =1) P (yv |xv =−1)

to

each

check

node c, c ∈ Nv.

• (Check node) At each iteration , ≥ 0, each check node

c sends a message m˜ (c,v) to each variable node v, v ∈ Nc :

m˜ c(,v) =

v

∈Nc\{v}

sign(m˜ (v

) ,c

)

v

min
∈Nc\{v}

|m˜ v(

) ,c

|

.

• (Variable node) At each iteration , ≥ 1, each variable

node v sends a message m˜ (v,)c to each check node c, c ∈

Nv :

m˜ (v,)c = m˜ (v0,c) +

m˜ (c

−1) ,v

.

c ∈Nv \{c}

Each variable node also computes a sum message

m˜ v( ) = m˜ (v0) +

m˜ (c,v−1).

c∈Nv

The codeword bits are decided by the signs of the sum messages.

In this paper, we consider finite precision decoders, broadly deployed in practice. In such decoders, the messages are quantized and stored in the memory cells using a (binary) signmagnitude representation. The sign-magnitude representation of each message is determined by the quantization resolution and the number of bits b used to represent the message. For example, when b = 5 and the quantization resolution is 1 bit, the signmagnitude representation of 12 is 01100, where the first bit, 0, stands for the positive sign, and the remaining bits represent the magnitude. The value of b is typically between 4 and 7 in practical LDPC decoders [13].

III. NOISY MIN-SUM DECODER AND DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS
A. Noisy Decoder Model
In this paper, we use the bit-flipping model for faulty memories, also considered in [10] and [14]. We model the effect of errors in each memory cell as passing a binary input through a binary symmetric channel (BSC) with cross-over probability ρ. To be more specific, suppose a bit is stored in a memory cell. The value retrieved at read time differs from the original value with probability ρ. Such memory errors may be caused by voltage over-scaling, semiconductor process

variation, electromagnetic interference, etc. [2]. We assume that the BSCs for different memory cells are independent but have the same cross-over (bit-flipping) probability ρ, and that the logic gates computing the messages are noise-free. As shown in [7], [14], errors at the check nodes do not have much impact on the residual error rates of the LDPC decoders. We therefore assume noise-free check node memory cells to simplify the analysis. On the other hand, variable node memory cells, which store the variable-to-check messages and the sum (posterior log likelihood-ratio) messages, are subject to errors. In Section IV, we propose an adaptive coding scheme to correct harmful variable node memory errors and improve the noisy decoder performance.

B. Density Evolution Analysis
Density evolution of the noisy finite precision min-sum decoder with the above hardware error model was derived in [10] under Gaussian communication channel with noise variance σ. The major difference between noise-free and noisy min-sum decoder density evolution analysis is the “distribution perturbation” due to the BSCs modeling memory cell errors. Denote the quantized variable-to-check messages at iteration before the memory errors are applied by mˆ v( ,)c. With the faulty memory cells, the variable-to-check messages retrieved from the memory cells, denoted by m(v,)c, might be different from mˆ (v,)c. Based on the analysis in [10], we express the “distribution perturbation” as a linear transformation:

p( ) = A(ρ)pˆ( ),

(1)

where p( ) is a length-2b − 1 vector representing the probability mass function (PMF) of m(v,)c, pˆ( ) is a length-2b − 1 vector representing the PMF of mˆ v( ,)c, and A(ρ) is a 2b − 1 × 2b − 1 matrix. Recall that as defined in Sec. II-B, b is the number of bits in the sign-magnitude representation of each message. Detailed derivation of pˆ( ) can be found in [10]. The matrix A(ρ) is derived as follows. Let {αi}2i=b−11 be the set of possible values of messages mˆ (v,)c and mv( ,)c. Let the ith entry in p( ) denote the probability of the event mv( ,)c = αi, 1 ≤ i ≤ 2b − 1. Likewise, let the ith entry in pˆ( ) denote the probability of the event mˆ (v,)c = αi. The (i, j) entry in A(ρ), Ai,j(ρ), denotes the conditional probability of the event m(v,)c = αi given mˆ (v,)c = αj, is calculated as
Ai,j (ρ) = P (m(v,)c = αi|mˆ v( ,)c = αj ) = (1 − ρ)b−di,j ρdi,j , (2)

where di,j is the Hamming distance between the sign-magnitude
representation of αi and αj. The residual error rate pr( ) at iteration is then derived as

pr( ) =

p(i

)

+

pζ( 2

)

,

(3)

αi <0

where pi( ) is the ith entry in p( ), and ζ is the index of the

entry in p( ) representing the probability of the message being

zero, i.e., αζ = 0. When the message is equal to zero, we pick

uniformly at random either +1 or −1 as the transmitted signal.

1907
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. ADAPTIVE ERROR-CORRECTING CODES FOR THE NOISY MIN-SUM DECODER
We begin with some key observations from the message update rules and the density evolution analysis for the noisy min-sum decoder. Then, we design the adaptive error-correcting codes for the variable node memory and develop density evolution analysis for the noisy min-sum decoder using the proposed codes.
A. Code Design
From the density evolution analysis in [10], we observe that when the communication channel noise and hardware error rates are sufficiently small and when is sufficiently large, the PMF of mˆ v( ,)c concentrates at the largest positive number (as with the noise-free min-sum decoder), and most of the residual errors come from the bit flips in the memory cells storing sign bits, wherein the largest representable positive value, i.e., the correct value, is converted to the largest representable negative value, i.e., the incorrect value. Bit flips in the other direction, namely, converting the largest representable negative value to the largest representable positive value, is possible, and will be taken into consideration when we perform density evolution analysis in Section IV-B. On the other hand, when is small and when most of the messages have small magnitudes, due to the min operations at the check nodes, the decoding process is sensitive to the precision level of the small-magnitude messages.
Inspired by the above observations, we design the following error-correcting codes for memory cells in the noisy min-sum decoder. When the most significant bit (MSB) is 1, we encode the sign bit by a (3, 1) repetition code, we discard the two least significant bits (LSBs), which are the last two bits in the signmagnitude representation, and we store the two extra bits in the memory cells (originally) storing the two LSBs. When the MSB is 0, we directly store the messages (in the sign-magnitude representation) in the memory cells. When we retrieve the bits from the memory cells, if the MSB reads as 1, we determine the message sign bit by decoding the (3, 1) repetition code (one read from sign bit memory cell and two reads from the two LSB memory cells). The two LSBs at the input of the computation unit (in a variable node) can be randomly selected from 0 and 1; if the MSB reads as 0, the message is the same as what we retrieve from the memory cells.
The idea is that, since the LSBs (which affect the precision level) are less important when the magnitude of the message is large (MSB equals 1 case), we use the LSBs to protect the more important sign-bit in this case. When the message magnitude is small, we leave the LSBs unaltered since in this case precision is more important.
When the number of bits b is larger, more sophisticated channel coding schemes can be employed. For example, when b ≥ 8, we can use a (7, 4) Hamming code on the sign bit and the 6 LSBs. In this paper, however, to simplify the analysis, we focus on the (3, 1) repetition code. B. Density Evolution Analysis of the Robust Min-Sum Decoder
The major difference between the density evolution analysis of the nominal min-sum decoder and that of the robust min-sum

decoder is in the linear transformation (2). Given the coding

scheme introduced in Sec. IV-A, the linear transformation

becomes

p( ) = BA(ρ)Gpˆ( ),

(4)

where both G and B are 2b − 1 × 2b − 1 matrices. The

matrix G corresponds to the encoding process, and the matrix

B corresponds to the decoding process. To keep the analysis

simple, we assume that the two LSBs at the input to the

computation unit (in the variable node) are set to be the same

as the decoded sign bit instead of being selected randomly.

We construct G as follows. The set of 2b−1 b-bit representations whose MSB is 1 is divided into 2b−3 equivalence classes

Φ0, Φ1, . . . Φ2b−3−1. Each equivalence class Φj has four elements, βj,q, q ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}. The element βj,q has the signmagnitude representation sj1aj,1aj,2 . . . aj,b−4z1z2, where the sj and aj,k’s (k = 1, 2, . . . , b−4) are either 0 or 1, and 0z1z2 is the sign-magnitude representation of length 3 of the index q. Let

φ(j) map the index j of the equivalence class Φj to the index of the message value αφ(j) which belongs to Φj and has the sign-magnitude representation sj1aj,1aj,2 . . . aj,b−4sjsj. The equivalence class Φj is represented by αφ(j).
In the encoding process, all the elements in Φj are mapped
to αφ(j). Note that the probability of αφ(j) is represented as the φ(j)th entry in pˆ( ). Let the probabilities of the other

three elements in Φj be represented as the v1(j)th, v2(j)th, and v3(j)th entries, respectively, in pˆ( ) (v1(j), v2(j), v3(j) ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . , 2b}). In G, for j = 0, 1, . . . , 2b−3 −1, the row φ(j)

has 1’s in columns φ(j), v1(j), v2(j), and v3(j), 0’s elsewhere, and the rows v1(j), v2(j), and v3(j) have all-zero entries. In the rest of the rows of G, all entries are 0 except for the ones

on the diagonal.

For example, when b = 5, the following entries in G

are 1: (1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (5, 5), (5, 6), (5, 7), (5, 8),

(γ, γ), (24, 24), (24, 25), (24, 26), (24, 27), (28, 28), (28, 29),

(28, 30), (28, 31), γ = 9, 10, . . . , 23. Other entries are 0. Note

that α1 = −15, α2 = −14, . . . , α31 = 15 in this example. In the decoding process, we divide the set of 2b−1 b-bit

representations whose MSB is 1 into 2b−3 equivalence classes

Ψ0, Ψ1, . . . , Ψ2b−3−1. Denote the majority function (taking the majority value among its three binary inputs) by gma(z1, z2, z3). Each equivalence class Ψj has four elements, θj,q, q ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}. The element θj,q has the sign-magnitude representation uj,q,11cj,1cj,2 . . . cj,b−4uj,q,2uj,q,3, where the cj,k’s (k = 1, 2, . . . , b − 4) are either 0 or 1, and uj,q,1, uj,q,2, uj,q,3 satisfy gma(uj,q,1, uj,q,2, uj,q,3) = sj , sj ∈ {0, 1}. Let ψ(j) map the index j of the equivalence class Ψj to the index of the message value αψ(j) which belongs to Ψj and has the sign-magnitude representation sj1cj,1cj,2 . . . cj,b−4sjsj. The equivalence class Ψj is represented by αψ(j).
Following the construction of G, here we derive the matrix B.

In the decoding process, each element in Ψj is mapped to αψ(j).
Note that the probability of αψ(j) is represented as the ψ(j)th entry in pˆ( ). Let the probabilities of the other three elements in

Ψj be represented as the w1(j)th, w2(j)th, and w3(j)th entries, respectively, in pˆ( ) (w1(j), w2(j), w3(j) ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . , 2b}). In B, for j = 0, 1, . . . , 2b−3−1, the row ψ(j) has 1’s in columns

1908
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

w1(j), w2(j), w3(j), and ψ(j), 0’s elsewhere, and the rows w1(j), w2(j), and w3(j) have all-zero entries. In the rest of the rows in B, all entries are 0 except for the ones on the

diagonal.

Following the example we have for G, the following entries

in B are 1: (1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 31), (5, 5), (5, 6), (5, 7),

(5, 27), (γ, γ), (24, 24), (24, 25), (24, 26), (24, 8), (28, 28),

(28, 29), (28, 30), (28, 4), γ = 9, 10, . . . , 23. The rest of the

entries are 0. We compute the residual error rate p(r ) of the nominal and the

robust min-sum decoders via density evolution. We consider the

LDPC code with (dv, dc) = (3, 6). We set the communication
noise standard deviation σ = 0.7, b = 5, and the maximum number of iterations L = 200. The p(rL) w.r.t. different ρ’s are shown in Fig. 1. We also show pr( ) in each iteration (up to 30) for the bit-flipping probabilities ρ = 10−3, 10−4 in Fig. 2.

We observe that the residual error rate of the robust min-sum

decoder is roughly on the order of the square of the residual

error rate of the nominal min-sum decoder, and the robust min-

sum decoder has a lower error rate than the nominal min-sum

decoder in every iteration. The improvement in the residual error

rate is due to our adaptive coding scheme: in the nominal min-

sum decoder, a single memory cell error in the sign bit results

in a decoded bit error, while in the robust min-sum decoder, at

least 2 memory cell errors are required to result in a decoded

bit error.

The above argument for residual error rate improvement

applies to any regular LDPC codes. Let the i∗th entry in pˆ( ) for the robust min-sum decoder be 1 − r(b), and the nominal minsum decoder be 1 − (nm) , where i∗ = arg maxi αi. That is, the

probabilities of the noise-free variable node messages having

the largest representable positive value at iteration

are 1 −

() rb

and 1 −

() nm

for

the

robust

and

nominal

min-sum

decoders,

respectively. Denote the approximation of the residual error rate

of the robust min-sum decoder up to the second order terms of ρ by p˘r(,r)b, and denote the approximation of the residual error rate of the nominal min-sum decoder up to the second order terms of ρ by p˘(r,n) m. Then, we have the following lemma:

Lemma 1. If the communication noise and ρ are sufficiently

small and

is sufficiently large so that

(rb),

() nm

<

ρ3,

then

p˘(r,r)b = (p˘r(,n) m)2.

Proof: Since the sign bits are flipped with probability ρ,

() nm

<

ρ3,

and

(nm) ρ < ρ4, we have

pr(,n) m ≈2 (1 − (nm) )ρ ≈2 ρ = p˘(r,n) m,

(5)

where ≈2 denotes the approximation up to the second order terms of ρ. Since with the proposed adaptive coding scheme, at

least two bit flips are required to cause an error in the decoded

sign bit,

() ad

<

ρ3,

and

a( d)ρ2 < ρ5, we have

p(r,r)b ≈2 (1 − (ad))ρ2 ≈2 ρ2 = p˘r(,r)b.

(6)

Therefore, p˘(r,r)b = (p˘r(,n) m)2. We thus conclude that the robust min-sum decoder achieves

a significant error rate reduction by adaptively duplicating the

sign bit in 2 memory cells storing LSBs without adding any

100

Residual error rate

10−5

10−10

10−1150−6

Nominal min−sum decoder Robust min−sum decoder

10−4 ρ

10−2

Fig. 1. Residual error rate comparison of the nominal and robust min-sum decoders for different ρ.
100

Error rate

10−5

10−10

Nominal min−sum decoder(ρ=10−3) Robust min−sum decoder(ρ=10−3) Nominal min−sum decoder(ρ=10−4) Robust min−sum decoder(ρ=10−4)

0

5

10 15 20 25 30

Iteration

Fig. 2. Comparison of the residual error rate at the end of each iteration for the nominal and robust min-sum decoders.
redundant memory cells. In fact, by using length n code capable of correcting k errors, we are able to reduce p(r,r)b to the order of (p(r,n) m)k+1 when the communication noise and ρ are sufficiently small.
Next, we show the improvement in the decoding threshold by our adaptive error-correcting code. The settings are the same as the previous example (Fig. 1 and 2), except that we use the bitflipping probabilities ρ = 5×10−4 and vary the communication channel noise standard deviation σ. The numerical results are shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, we observe that as with the noisefree min-sum decoder, both the nominal and the robust minsum decoders exhibit a sharp drop in the residual error rates as σ decreases below certain values. A similar phenomenon was also observed in [15]. As in [15], we refer to the σ value corresponding to the sharp drop on the curve (for the nominal and robust min-sum) as the phase transition point. The phase transition points are 0.796 and 0.803 for the nominal and the robust min-sum decoders, respectively. The decoding threshold of the noise-free min-sum decoder is 0.811. It is also worth noting that the proposed adaptive coding scheme not only lowers the error floor, but also moves the phase transition point closer to the decoding threshold of the noise-free min-sum decoder.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

We now compare via simulations the residual error rates of the nominal and the robust min-sum decoder for finite length LDPC codes under the noisy decoder model introduced in Section III-A. We use a (3, 6)-regular LDPC code with code length 2640 [16]. The communication channel noise is modeled as a zero-mean Gaussian random variable with variance σ2. The bit-flipping probability of the faulty memories is ρ. The maximum number of iteration is 30.

1909
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Residual error rate

100 Nominal

Robust

10−2

Noise−free

10−4

The simulation results show that by using the proposed adaptive error-correcting code, we effectively reduce the residual error rates of the noisy decoder without adding any redundant memory cells, which agrees with the density evolution analysis results in Section IV-B.

10−6
10−8 0.77 0.78 0.79 0.8 0.81 0.82 0.83 Standard deviation σ
Fig. 3. Comparison of residual error rates of nominal, robust and noise-free min-sum decoders under different σ.
10−2

Residual error rate

10−4

10−6

Nominal min−sum decoder

Fig. 4.

Robust min−sum decoder

10−8

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

ρ

x 10−4

Comparison of residual error rates of the nominal and robust min-sum

decoders under different ρ.

We first fix σ = 0.7 and compare the residual error rates of the nominal and the robust min-sum decoders under different ρ’s. The residual error curves shown in Fig. 4 exhibit the same trend as predicted by the density evolution analysis (Fig. 1): the residual error rate of the robust min-sum decoder is roughly on the order of the square of the residual error rate of the nominal min-sum decoder, as predicted in Lemma 1.
Next, we fix ρ = 5 × 10−4 and compare the residual error rate of the nominal and robust min-sum decoders under different σ’s (Fig. 5). It is clear that when σ is large, the residual error rates of the nominal and robust min-sum decoder are the same, while for small σ, the residual error rate of the robust minsum decoder is roughly the square of the residual error rate of the nominal min-sum decoder. In the transition region between small and large σ (0.73 < σ < 0.8 in Fig. 5), the robust minsum decoder still achieves a much smaller residual error rate than the nominal min-sum decoder.

100

Residual error rate

10−2

10−4

10−6

Nominal min−sum decoder

Robust min−sum decoder

10−8 0.7

0.75

0.8

σ

0.85

Fig. 5. Comparison of residual error rates of the nominal and robust min-sum decoders under different σ.

VI. CONCLUSION
We proposed an adaptive error correction coding scheme for the noisy min-sum LDPC decoder by exploiting the message characteristics and the error behavior of the noisy min-sum decoder under our memory error model. We developed the density evolution analysis of the robust min-sum decoder using the proposed adaptive code. We demonstrated numerically that the proposed approach significantly lowers the residual error rate compared to the nominal case; this result was also supported by simulations for a finite-length code. Future work includes taking check node memory and computation unit errors into consideration and applying the proposed adaptive code design approach to a more general class of inference algorithms.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by NSF grant 1029030.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Gupta et al., “Underdesigned and opportunistic computing in presence of hardware variability,” IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 8–23, Jan. 2013.
[2] S. Ganapathy et al., “Variability-aware design space exploration of embedded memories,” in IEEE IEEEI, 2014.
[3] B. Vasic and S. Chilappagari, “An information theoretical framework for analysis and design of nanoscale fault-tolerant memories based on lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 2438 –2446, Nov. 2007.
[4] C. Roth et al., “Data mapping for unreliable memories,” in ACCCC, 2012. [5] F. Frustaci et al., “13.8 a 32kb SRAM for error-free and error-tolerant
applications with dynamic energy-quality management in 28nm CMOS,” in IEEE ISSCC, 2014. [6] L. R. Varshney, “Performance of LDPC codes under faulty iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4427–4444, Jul. 2011. [7] S. Tabatabaei Yazdi, H. Cho, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B decoder on noisy hardware,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1660–1673, May 2013. [8] C.-H. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B LDPC decoder with transient and permanent errors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 15–28, Jan. 2014. [9] S. M. S. Tabatabaei, C.-H. Huang, and L. Dolecek, “Optimal design of a Gallager B noisy decoder for irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2052–2055, Dec. 2012. [10] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and A. Burg, “Density evolution for minsum decoding of LDPC codes under unreliable message storage,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 849–852, May 2014. [11] C. K. Ngassa, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, “Min-sum-based decoders running on noisy hardware,” in IEEE Globecom, 2013. [12] C.-H. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, “Belief propagation algorithms on noisy hardware,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 11–24, Jan 2015. [13] C. Studer et al., “Configurable high-throughput decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in IEEE ACSSC, 2008. [14] M. May, M. Alles, and N. Wehn, “A case study in reliability-aware design: a resilient LDPC code decoder,” in DATE, 2008. [15] C. L. K. Ngassa, V. Savin, E. Dupraz, and D. Declercq, “Density evolution and functional threshold for the noisy min-sum decoder,” arXiv preprint, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.6594 [16] D. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes.” [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html

1910
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:56:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

