The Multi-Step PEG and ACE Constrained PEG Algorithms Can Design the LDPC Codes with
Better Cycle-Connectivity
Xuan He, Liang Zhou, Junyi Du and Zhiping Shi National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Communications
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China Chengdu, P. R. China
Email: helaoxuan@126.com, lzhou@uestc.edu.cn, jydu1989@163.com, szp@uestc.edu.cn

AbstractŌĆöThis paper proposes two new cycle-optimized algorithms, called the multi-step progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm and the multi-step approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) constrained PEG algorithm, to design an LDPC code with larger girth and better cycle-connectivity. In addition, an efficient method is developed to calculate the distances between the variable nodes (VNs) and the check nodes (CNs) in the proposed algorithms. Simulation results show that compared to the conventional cycle-optimized algorithms, the proposed algorithms can achieve both better cycle-connectivity and foreseeable lower error floors.
I. INTRODUCTION
The density evolution (DE) [1], [2] is an effective tool to optimize the degree distribution of an LDPC code without considering the effects of cycles in the Tanner graph (TG). However, the cycles with small size and weak connectivity significantly degrade the performance of LDPC codes [3], [4]. To reduce the influence of cycles, Hu et al. [3] proposed the progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm to construct the TG with a large girth, and Tian et al. [4] proposed the approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) algorithm to enhance the cycle-connectivity of the TG. Then, several ACE-optimized algorithms [5]-[7] have been proposed, among which the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7] achieves the largest ACE spectra [6] and the lowest error floors. Recently, some PEGoptimized algorithms [8]-[10] have been proposed, which include the whole original PEG algorithm [3] as a subpart in their implementations.
Inspired by the ideas in [3]-[7], this paper proposes the multi-step PEG (MSPEG) algorithm, which regards the original PEG algorithm [3] as a special case. In addition, as larger ACE-property generally results in lower error floors [4][7], we propose the multi-step ACE constrained PEG (MSACPEG) algorithm by combining the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7] together with the MSPEG algorithm. Furthermore, a new method is developed to calculate the distances between the variable nodes (VNs) and the check nodes (CNs) in the proposed algorithms, which is much more time-efficient than the conventional method used in the original PEG algorithm [3]. Simulation results show that compared to the conventional cycle-optimized algorithms in [3]-[7], the proposed algorithms can achieve both better cycle-connectivity and foreseeable lower error floors. In addition, the proposed
This work was partially supported by China Electronics Technology Group Corporation, HUAWEI Corporation and the national key projects under Grant No. 2015ZX03002010-004.

algorithms can be easily applied to the PEG-optimized algorithms [8]-[10] by replacing the PEG algorithm [3] in their implementations.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the backgrounds about ACE and PEG. Section III proposes the MSPEG algorithm and MSACPEG algorithm. Section IV presents the simulation results. And finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUNDS
Denote n as the number of VNs, m as the number of CNs, E as the number of edges, vj , j ’ĆĮ1, 2, , n as the j-th VN, and ci , i ’ĆĮ 1, 2, , m as the i-th CN in the TG.
A. ACE and ACE Spectrum ACE [4] is used to measure the connectivity between a
cycle and the TG, and the ACE value associated with a cycle is
defined as ’āź j ’Ć©deg ’Ć©vj ’Ć® ’ĆŁ 2’Ć®, where deg ’Ć©v j ’Ć® is the degree of
the j-th VN of the cycle, and the summation is taken over all VNs of the cycle. ACE spectrum [6] is used to measure the connectivity between cycles and the TG. For a TG G, the ACE spectrum of depth dmax of G is defined as a dmax -tuple
’ü© ’Ć©G’Ć® ’ĆĮ ’Ć©’ü©2 , ’ü©4 , ’Ć® , ’ü©2dmax , where ’ü©2i , i ’ĆĮ 1, 2, , dmax is
the minimum ACE value of all length-2i cycles in G. If there is no cycle with length 2i, ’ü©2i is set as ’éź (infinity).
B. PEG Algorithm The PEG algorithm [3] constructs TG by establishing edges
between VNs and CNs in stages, where in each stage only one edge is established. Each VN takes several continuous stages to establish its own edges, and the establishment of each edge keeps the current local girth of the assumed VN as large as possible. In this paper, for convenience, the VN current in interest is denoted as vc. There are two procedures at each stage, i.e., the calculation procedure and the selection procedure. In the calculation procedure, the distances between vc and each CN are calculated. And in the selection procedure, a local optimum CN is selected to establish an edge between it and vc .
The selection strategy used in the selection procedure is a sequence of selection criterion of decreasing priority [7]. If

978-1-4673-7704-1/15/$31.00 ┬®2015 IEEE

46

ISIT 2015

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

multiple CNs survive any selection criterion, the next selection criterion is applied on the surviving CNs only. The selection strategy of the PEG algorithm [3] is summarized as follows:
Selection strategy of the PEG algorithm [3]: Select a CN which is farthest from vc ’é« Select a survivor whose degree is minimal ’é« Select a survivor randomly.
The calculation procedure is the most time-consuming part of the PEG algorithm [3]. The authors of [3] employ a breadthfirst search (BFS) like method to implement the calculation. In the worst case, the computational complexity of doing BFS
once is O’Ć©m ’Ć½ E ’Ć®. Thus, the total computational complexity
’Ć© ’Ć® of the original PEG algorithm [3] is O m E ’Ć½ E 2 .
C. ACE Constrained PEG Algorithm1
Implementation of the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7] somehow follows the idea of the original PEG algorithm [3], except there are a few differences between their calculation procedures and selection procedures. In the calculation procedure of the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7], each CNŌĆÖs distance from vc as well as its minimum path ACE metric2 are calculated. And in the selection procedure of the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7], the following selection strategy is adopted:
Selection strategy of the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7]: Select a CN which is farthest from vc ’é« Select a survivor whose minimum path ACE metric is largest ’é« Select a survivor whose degree is minimal ’é« Select a survivor randomly.
In the calculation procedure of the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7], a similar BFS like method is employed to calculate both the distances and the minimum path ACE metric. The total computational complexity of the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7] is the same as that of the original PEG
’Ć© ’Ć® algorithm [3], i.e., O m E ’Ć½ E 2 .
III. MULTI-STEP PEG ALGORITHM AND MULTI-STEP ACE CONSTRAINED PEG ALGORITHM
A. Multi-Step PEG Algorithm
As in each stage of the original PEG algorithm [3], a CN is selected to only greedily maximize the current local girth of vc , thus the final local girth of vc may not be the largest after all edges of vc are established. To greedily maximize the final local girth of vc , this paper proposes an improvement of the PEG algorithm [3], called the multi-step PEG algorithm, by taking the influence of later CNsŌĆÖ selections into consideration when currently selecting the local optimal CN at one stage.
Following the idea of the original PEG algorithm [3], the MSPEG algorithm also constructs edges between VNs and CNs in stages, where in each stage only one edge is established.
1 The ACE constrained PEG algorithm introduced here is a little different from the original one in [7]. See [7] for more details.
2 A CNŌĆÖs minimum path ACE metric is defined as the minimum ACE value among all ACE values associated with the shortest paths connecting the assumed CN and vc [7].

Each VN also takes several continuous stages to establish its own edges. However, instead of selecting a CN to maximize the current local girth of vc in each stage as in the original PEG algorithm [3], the r-step PEG algorithm, where r is regarded as the algorithm-step, selects a CN whose r - step local girth is the largest. The r-step local girth of a CN c is
defined as the largest local girth of vc when r more edges, including edge ’Ć©vc , c’Ć®, which are associated with vc but currently have not been established yet, are established. The MSPEG algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Multi-step PEG algorithm Initialize the algorithm-step r. for j ’ĆĮ 1 to n do begin
for k ’ĆĮ 1 to deg ’Ć©vj ’Ć® do
begin
t ’é¼ min’ü╗r, deg ’Ć©vj ’Ć® ’ĆŁ k ’Ć½1’üĮ.
Establish edge (vj , c), where c is the CN whose t-step local girth is largest. end end
In the above pseudo-code of Algorithm 1, t is the actual algorithm-step when calculating the multi-step local girth for a CN as the number of edges of vc that have not been
established yet may be less than r (i.e., deg ’Ć©vj ’Ć® ’ĆŁ k ’Ć½1 ’Ć╝ r ).
When there are multiple CNs with the same largest multi-step local girth at one stage, the whole selection strategy used in the original PEG algorithm [3] will be applied to break the tie. In such case, the one-step PEG algorithm is totally the same as the original PEG algorithm [3].
When calculating the t-step local girth of CN c, the edge
(vc , c) can be established first, and then the other t ’ĆŁ1 edges are established by enumeration so as to find the largest local girth of vc. To make the enumeration simple, the depth-first search (DFS) algorithm is employed, where in each layer of the DFS there are three steps to calculate the t-step local girth for a CN c :
Step 1: Establish edge ’Ć©vc , c’Ć® and move to Step 2. The edge established here will keep existing in the TG until Step 3 of this layer is finished.
Step 2: If t ’ĆĮ 1, calculate the local girth of vc and go to Step 3. Otherwise, try every suitable selection of the next CN and calculate the ’Ć©t ’ĆŁ1’Ć®-step local girth of the tried CN in the next layer (where the DFS process is one layer deeper). After the search in the next layer is finished, the DFS process will return here. And after all suitable selections of the next CN are tried, this step is finished. Then, the t-step local girth of c
equals the largest one of all the ’Ć©t ’ĆŁ1’Ć®-step local girths of the tried CNs.
Step 3: Delete edge ’Ć©vc , c’Ć®. This is for recovering the TG before the DFS process returns to the previous layer.
The DFS calculation of the multi-step local girth is presented in Algorithm 2.

47
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 2: DFS calculation of the multi-step local girth Initialize vc , c, t. dist ’é¼ the distance between vc and c. if t ’ĆĮ 1
return dist ’Ć½1. else
Establish edge ’Ć©vc , c’Ć®. res ’é¼ ’ĆŁ’éź. for i ’ĆĮ 1 to m do // to enumerate the next CN. begin
nxtDist ’é¼ the distance between vc and ci . if dist ’é│ nxtDist // to sieve the suitable CNs.
tmp ’é¼ ’Ć©t ’ĆŁ1’Ć® -step local girth of ci . // the DFS // process goes to the next layer here to get the // ’Ć©t ’ĆŁ1’Ć® -step local girth of ci . if tmp ’ĆŠ res
res ’é¼ tmp.
end Delete edge ’Ć©vc , c’Ć®. return res.

In Algorithm 2, the constraint dist ’é│ nxtDist is used to sieve the suitable selections of the next CN, avoid redundant enumeration and ensure the calculationŌĆÖs correctness and efficiency. The reason is explained as follows.
Definition 1: In the DFS calculation of the multi-step local girth for a CN, a length-t tried-check-node sequence (TCNS)
is defined as a t-tuple ’Ć©c1, c2 , , ct ’Ć®, where ci , i ’ĆĮ 1, 2, , t is the CN tried in the corresponding layer (larger i means a deeper layer). And the distance sequence (DS) associated with the previous TCNS is defined as ’Ć©dist_c1, dist_c2, , dist_ct ’Ć®, where dist_ci , i ’ĆĮ 1, 2, , t
is the distance between vc and ci when edges ’Ć©vc , cj ’Ć®, j ’Ć╝ i are established and edges ’Ć©vc , cj ’Ć®, j ’é│ i are not. The DS is
defined as nonincreasing if dist_ci ’é│ dist_cj holds for 1 ’éŻ i ’Ć╝ j ’éŻ t.

Theorem 1: For any TCNS, if its associating DS is not nonincreasing, the orders of CNs in the original TCNS can be rearranged to make the new associating DS nonincreasing.

Proof: Consider a length-two TCNS ’Ć©c1, c2 ’Ć® firstly, whose

associating DS ’Ć©dist_c1, dist_c2 ’Ć® is strictly increasing (i.e.,

dist_c1 ’Ć╝ dist_c2 ). In this case, if edges ’Ć©vc , c1 ’Ć® and ’Ć©vc , c2 ’Ć®

are established, it holds that the minimum length of cycles

passing through ’Ć©vc , c1 ’Ć® is dist_c1 ’Ć½1, and any cycle passing

through ’Ć©vc , c1 ’Ć® with length dist_c1 ’Ć½1 does not pass through

’Ć©vc , c2 ’Ć®. Now, swap c1 and c2 to change the original TCNS

’Ć©c1, c2 ’Ć® to a new TCNS ’Ć©c2 , c1 ’Ć®, and denote the DS associated

with the new TCNS as ’Ć©newDist_c2, newDist_c1 ’Ć®. In this

case, it holds that

newDist_c2 ’é│ dist_c2 ’ĆŠ dist_c1 ’ĆĮ newDist_c1

(1)

which means the DS associated with the new TCNS is

nonincreasing.

For any TCNS, if its associating DS is not nonincreasing,

find the leftmost position i firstly where dist_ci ’Ć╝ dist_ci’Ć½1, and

then swap ci and ci’Ć½1 in the TCNS. This operation is regarded as the find-swap operation. Referring to (1), the associating DS

can be made nonincreasing by repeatedly doing the find-swap

operations at most t ’Ć©t ’ĆŁ1’Ć® 2 times, where t is the length of

the assumed TCNS.

Ō¢Ā

From Theorem 1, itŌĆÖs known that the DS associated with any TCNS can always be made nonincreasing. There are three significant advantages by making the associating DS nonincreasing: Firstly, any candidate combination of TCNS
would not be missed; Secondly, when the edges between vc
and each CN in the TCNS are established, the local girth of vc can be calculated easily, which equals one plus the last element of the DS associated with the assumed TCNS; Thirdly, the DFS calculation of the multi-step local girth for a CN can be greatly accelerated.

In Algorithm 2, the distances between CNs and vc are frequently required, and they need to be recalculated when a new edge is established. However, the distances do not need to be recalculated when an old edge is deleted, since they can be recovered by recording the original distances just before the assumed edge was established. Most distance-calculation happens in the second deepest layer, which is at most mr’ĆŁ1 times when the algorithm-step is r . If BFS is employed to calculate the distances again as in the original PEG algorithm [3], in the worst case, the total computational complexity of the
’Ć© ’Ć® r-step PEG algorithm is O mr E ’Ć½ mr’ĆŁ1 E 2 . Here, a new
method, called the distance-based version (DBV), is developed to efficiently calculate the distances between VNs and CNs in the MSPEG algorithm.
In the DBV, a vector distVC is used to record the distances between each CN and vc , where distVC ’Ć©ci ’Ć®, 1 ’éŻ i ’éŻ m records the distance between the CN ci and vc , and a matrix distCC is used to record the distances between each CN pair, where
distCC ’Ć©ci , cj ’Ć®, 1 ’éŻ i, j ’éŻ m records the distance between CNs
ci and c j . Each element of distVC is set as ’éź just before the
establishment of the first edge of each vc , and each element of distCC is set as ’éź before the establishment of the first edge of the TG. Now, the distances between every CN and vc are told by distVC, which needs to be updated when a new edge is
established. Assume edge ’Ć©vc , ca ’Ć® is established, if the distance between some CN and vc becomes shorter, the shortest path must pass through ’Ć©vc , ca ’Ć®. Thus, distVC can be updated as follows when edge ’Ć©vc , ca ’Ć® is established:

for i ’ĆĮ 1 to m do begin
if distVC ’Ć©ci ’Ć® ’ĆŠ distCC ’Ć©ci ,ca ’Ć® ’Ć½1 distVC ’Ć©ci ’Ć® ’é¼ distCC ’Ć©ci ,ca ’Ć® ’Ć½1.
end

In addition, distCC needs to be updated after all edges associated with vc are established and before the initialization
of distVC for the next vc . distCC ’Ć©ci , cj ’Ć® changes only if
there appears a shorter path connecting ci and c j , which definitely passes through vc. Thus, distCC can be updated as follows:

48
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

for i ’ĆĮ 1 to m do begin
for j ’ĆĮ 1 to m do
begin
if distCC ’Ć©ci ,cj ’Ć® ’ĆŠ distVC ’Ć©ci ’Ć® ’Ć½ distVC ’Ć©cj ’Ć® distCC ’Ć©ci ,cj ’Ć® ’é¼ distVC ’Ć©ci ’Ć® ’Ć½ distVC ’Ć©cj ’Ć®.
end end
In this paper, the conventional method used in the original PEG algorithm [3] for distance-calculation based on BFS is regarded as the BFS-based version (BBV). In DBV, the computational complexity of updating distVC once is O’Ć©m’Ć®,
and the computational complexity of updating distCC once is
O’Ć©m2 ’Ć®. Thus, in the worst case, the total computational
complexity of the r-step PEG algorithm using DBV is
O’Ć©mr E ’Ć½ m2n’Ć®, which can be higher than that of the r-step
’Ć© ’Ć® PEG algorithm using BBV (i.e., O mr E ’Ć½ mr’ĆŁ1 E 2 ) if and
only if r ’ĆĮ 1 and m2n ’ĆŠ E 2 . Otherwise, especially when
r ’ĆŠ 1, which generally holds in the MSPEG algorithm, the new distance-calculation method is much more time-efficient than the conventional method.
B. Multi-Step ACE Constrained PEG Algorithm
Making the ACE-property larger can help an LDPC code to achieve lower error floors [4]-[7], and the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7] achieves the largest ACE spectra and the lowest error floors among the conventional cycle-optimized algorithms [3]-[7]. Inspired by that, by combining the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7] together with the MSPEG algorithm, this paper proposes a new cycle-optimized algorithm, called the multi-step ACE constrained PEG algorithm, to design LDPC codes with large ACE spectra.
Just like the relationship between the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7] and the PEG algorithm [3], the MSACPEG algorithm is implemented following the idea of the MSPEG algorithm. The distances between every CN and vc as well as the minimum path ACE metric are calculated in the MSACPEG algorithm. If BBV is applied, the minimum path ACE metric can be calculated following the idea in [7], and the computational complexity is the same as that of calculating the shortest paths [7]. In this case, the total computational complexity of the r-step ACE constrained PEG algorithm will
be the same as that of the r-step PEG algorithm using BBV
’Ć© ’Ć® (i.e., O mr E ’Ć½ mr’ĆŁ1 E 2 ). However, DBV can be applied to
the MSACPEG algorithm, where another vector is needed for recording the minimum path ACE metric between each CN and vc , and another matrix is needed for recording the minimum path ACE metric between each CN pair. The update of the minimum path ACE metric will strictly follow the update of the shortest paths, where update of the minimum path ACE metric happens if and only if a shorter path or a path with the same shortest length but a smaller ACE value appears. Thus, the computational complexity of updating the minimum path ACE metric is the same as that of updating the shortest paths, and the total computational complexity of the r-step ACE
constrained PEG algorithm will be the same as that of the
r-step PEG algorithm using DBV (i.e., O’Ć©mr E ’Ć½ m2n’Ć® ),

TABLE I.

ACE SPECTRA OF DIFFERENT CODE ENSEMBLES

average: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13.00, 6.08, 3.03’Ć® A1 maximum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13, 13, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0038
average: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13.00, 8.20, 3.03’Ć® A2 maximum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13, 13, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0130
average: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13.00, 12.53, 3.03’Ć® A3 maximum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13, 13, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0326
average: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13.00, 13.00, 3.03’Ć® A4 maximum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13, 13, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0295
average: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 18.21, 8.85, 3.82’Ć® B1 maximum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 26, 10, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0012
average: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 18.53, 9.61, 3.88’Ć® B2 maximum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 26, 13, 5’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0006
average: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 19.12, 12.69, 4.66’Ć® B3 maximum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 26, 13, 5’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0313
average: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 20.44, 13.00, 5.08’Ć® B4 maximum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 26, 13, 6’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0229

which can be higher than that of the r-step ACE constrained
’Ć© ’Ć® PEG algorithm using BBV (i.e., O mr E ’Ć½ mr’ĆŁ1 E 2 ) if and
only if r ’ĆĮ 1 and m2n ’ĆŠ E 2 . Finally, the selection strategy used in the MSACPEG algorithm is summarized as follows:
Selection strategy of the MSACPEG algorithm: Select a CN whose multi-step local girth is largest ’é« Select a survivor whose minimum path ACE metric of the multi-step local girth is largest ’é« Apply the whole selection strategy of the ACE constrained PEG algorithm [7].

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
For a better comparison to other work, this paper designs LDPC codes with the most popular parameters [3]: irregular codes with rate 1 2, length 1008, VN degree distribution 3
’ü¦ ’Ć© x’Ć® ’ĆĮ 0.47532x ’Ć½ 0.27953x2 ’Ć½ 0.03486x3 ’Ć½ 0.10889x4 ’Ć½ 0.10138x14.
To investigate the performance of the proposed algorithms, scenarios where r ’ĆĮ 1, 2, 3, 4 for both the r-step PEG algorithm and the r-step ACE constrained PEG algorithm are considered. And for convenience, the code ensemble designed based on the r-step PEG algorithm in Part A of Section III is
denoted as Ar , and the code ensemble designed based on the r-step ACE constrained PEG algorithm in Part B of Section
III is denoted as Br .
A. ACE Spectra In this part, the ACE spectra of different code ensembles
are investigated. For each code ensemble, more than 1000 codes are constructed, and their average ACE spectrum, maximum ACE spectrum as well as the frequency4 associated with the maximum ACE spectrum are also calculated. The results are presented in Table I.
From Table I, for code ensembles designed based on the

3

p
i

x

i

means the proportion of degree-i

VNs among all VNs is

pi .

4 The frequency associated with an ACE spectrum means the frequency

that the assumed ACE spectrum occurs among all spectra of codes from a

same code ensemble.

49
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II.
A1 A2 A3 A4 B1 B2 B3 B4

SELECTED CODESŌĆÖ ACE SPECTRA AND THEIR ASSOCIATING FREQUENCIES
spectrum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13, 13, 3’Ć® ; frequency: 0.1229 spectrum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13, 13, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0130 spectrum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13, 13, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0326 spectrum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 13, 13, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0295 spectrum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 19, 10, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0259 spectrum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 19, 13, 4’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0128 spectrum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 26, 13, 5’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0313 spectrum: ’Ć©’éź, ’éź, 26, 13, 6’Ć® ; frequency: 0.0229

MSPEG algorithm (i.e., A1-A4 ), it can be seen that the average ACE spectra increase as r increases, but different code ensembles achieve the same maximum ACE spectrum. Generally speaking, code ensembles with larger algorithm-step can achieve the maximum ACE spectrum with higher frequencies. For code ensembles designed based on the MSACPEG algorithm (i.e., B1-B4 ), it can be seen that both the average and the maximum ACE spectra increase as r increases. Furthermore, ACE spectra in the MSACPEG algorithm greatly surpass that in the MSPEG algorithm.
B. BER Performance
In this part, to investigate the bit error rate (BER) performance of the proposed algorithms under the same condition, two codes from each code ensemble of last Part A are randomly selected, keeping the ACE spectrum of each selected code largest with an associating frequency larger than 0.015. These selected codesŌĆÖ ACE spectra and their associating frequencies are presented in Table II.
BER estimation of the selected codes is performed using Monte-Carlo simulation, assuming binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) transmission over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and the standard sum-product algorithm (SPA) iterative decoding with 100 decoding iterations at the receiver. At least 100 block errors are captured at each simulation point. For the two codes from a same code ensemble, the one which has achieved lower BER at Eb N0 ’ĆĮ 2.8 dB is remained. Simulation results are shown in Fig. 1.
From Fig. 1, it can be seen that each code designed based on the MSACPEG algorithm outperforms the codes designed based on the MSPEG algorithm in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region between 2.5 dB and 2.8 dB. And among the four codes designed based on the MSACPEG algorithm (i.e., B1-B4 ), B4 with the largest ACE spectrum achieves the lowest BER, and B1 with the smallest ACE spectrum achieves the highest BER. In such case, these simulation results are consistent with that larger ACE-property generally results in lower error floors [4]-[7].
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper proposes the MSPEG algorithm and the
5 This threshold is chosen with two considerations: Firstly, each code ensemble offers at least 10 candidate codes; Secondly, the ACE spectrum should be large enough and the chance to get a code with the same ACE spectrum by reconstructing codes of the same code ensemble will not be too small.

10-5

A1

A2

A3

A4

-6

10

B1

B2

B3

B4

10-7

Bit error rate

10-8

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 1. BER performance of (1008, 504) DE-optimized irregular LDPC codes designed using multi-step PEG and ACE constrained PEG algorithms.

MSACPEG algorithm to design an LDPC code with larger girth and better cycle-connectivity. In addition, a new method, called the DBV, is developed to calculate the distances between the VNs and the CNs in the proposed algorithms, which is much more time-efficient than the conventional method used in the original PEG algorithm [3]. Simulation results show that the MSACPEG algorithm achieves both larger ACE spectra and foreseeable lower error floors than the MSPEG algorithm. Furthermore, when the algorithm-step of the MSACPEG algorithm increases, the ACE spectra obviously increase and the error floors generally fall. In this case, the simulation results are consistent with that larger ACE-property generally results in lower error floors [4]-[7]. Frankly speaking, it can be expected that compared to the conventional cycleoptimized algorithms in [3]-[7], the MSACPEG algorithm with a large algorithm-step can be used to design LDPC codes with better cycle-connectivity and lower error floors.
REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, "The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.47, no.2, pp.599-618, Feb. 2001.
[2] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi and R. L. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.47, no.2, pp.619-637, Feb. 2001.
[3] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou and D. M. Arnold, "Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.51, no.1, pp.386-398, Jan. 2005.
[4] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor and R. D. Wesel, "Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction," IEEE Trans. Commun.,vol.52, no.8, pp.1242-1247, Aug. 2004.
[5] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, "Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes," in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2004.
[6] D. Vukobratovic, A. Djurendic and V. Senk, "ACE spectrum of LDPC codes and generalized ACE design," in International Conference on Communications, 2007.
[7] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, "Generalized ACE constrained progressive edge-growth LDPC code design," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.12, no.1, pp.32-34, Jan. 2008.
[8] X. Zheng, F. C. M. Lau and C. K. Tse, "Constructing short-length irregular LDPC codes with low error floor," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.58, no.10, pp.2823-2834, Oct. 2010.
[9] K. Sina, R. Asvadi and A. H. Banihashemi, "A PEG construction of finite-length LDPC codes with low error floor," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.16, no.8, pp.1288-1291, Aug. 2012.
[10] X Jiang, X. G. Xia and M. H. Lee, "Efficient progressive edge-growth algorithm based on Chinese remainder theorem," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.62, no.2, pp.442-451, Feb. 2014.

50
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:55:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

