IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JUNE 2015

327

Design of LDPC Coded BICM in DVB Broadcasting Systems With Block Permutations
Min Jang, Hyunjae Lee, Sang-Hyo Kim, Member, IEEE, Seho Myung, Hongsil Jeong, and Jaeyeol Kim

Abstract—A new simplified structure of bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) for second generation digital video broadcasting (DVB) standards, such as DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH is proposed. In the BICM of the DVB standards, parity and column-twist interleavers are employed in order to avoid possible performance degradation due to the structural weaknesses of the BICM scheme. In this paper, a new method is proposed of finding permutation-equivalent low-density parity-check codes that eliminate the BICM weaknesses without the column-twist interleaver, thereby simplifying the BICM structure of the DVB standards. The new code descriptions are found by applying a column permutation to the parity check matrices of the original codes in the DVB standards. The codes generated by these new descriptions have the same error correcting capability individually for a binary memoryless channel. However, the resulting BICM has a different structure that is free of weakness, called the less-capable check node.
Index Terms—Digital video broadcasting (DVB), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM), column-twist interleaving, less-capable check node (LCN), block permutation.
I. INTRODUCTION
F ROM the early 2000s, European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) has been developing second generation standards for digital video broadcasting (DVB) transmission: DVB-S2 for satellite services [1], DVB-T2 for terrestrial broadcasting systems [2]–[4], and DVB-C2 for cable systems [5]. In addition, the standardization of DVB-NGH for mobile handheld broadcasting services is now in progress and is expected to be finished in the near future [6]. The main goal of these systems is to increase the spectral efficiency. To achieve this goal, new physical layer techniques such as orthogonal frequency division multiplex (OFDM) modulation and an advanced new bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) scheme are included.
All the second generation DVB standards share a similar BICM structure. The BICM consists of forward error correction (FEC) coding, modulation, and bit interleaving. First, message bits are encoded by outer BCH codes and inner low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The LDPC codes provide excellent error-correcting performance [7], and residual errors are eliminated by the BCH codes in order to achieve an extremely low bit error rate. Since the errorcorrecting performance is improved compared to previous standards, it becomes possible to employ higher order modulation schemes to increase the spectral efficiency and the maximum data rate. To this end, DVB-T2 and DVB-NGH introduce high-order modulations up to 256-QAM, and DVB-C2 exploits even 1024-QAM and 4096-QAM.
Manuscript received August 2, 2014; revised October 27, 2014; accepted October 28, 2014. Date of publication February 24, 2015; date of current version June 4, 2015. This work was supported by Samsung Electronics.
M. Jang, H. Lee, and S.-H. Kim are with the College of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea (e-mail: iamshkim@skku.edu).
S. Myung, H. Jeong, and J. Kim are with the DMC Research and Development Center, Samsung Electronics, Suwon 443-742, Republic of Korea.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2015.2400815

Bit interleavers in the DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH standards are realized as a serial concatenation of several components, and they are designed to optimize the structure of the BICM, incorporating the employed FEC codes and modulations. When highorder modulations are used, bits sent over a single symbol can experience several different virtual bit channels derived from the same transmission channel. Some codeword bits are transmitted on good channels and others are sent on poor channels; a way to allocate codeword bits to modulation symbols thus needs to be considered. A bit interleaver is placed between the FEC encoder and the modulator to appropriately reorder codeword bits to guarantee good performance of BICM systems. In DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH, the bit interleaver is composed of the parity interleaver, the column-twist interleaver, and the block interleaver, while the demultiplexer also rearranges a bit sequence as an interleaver.
Among the component interleavers, the parity interleaver and the column-twist interleaver are specially introduced to avoid a certain weakness in the BICM structure with regard to the graph of the LDPC code used [8]. When encoded bits are modulated by a highorder scheme, several bits, which are constrained by a single linear equation in the LDPC code structure, may be sent over a single QAM symbol. The bits will then together experience a channel response, thereby being highly correlated after demapping at the receiver. If a BICM structure has many such QAM symbols, the performance can be degraded in channels with deep fades or erasures - even if they seldom occur - which is typical in terrestrial and cable broadcasting environments [9], [10]. Parity and column-twist interleavers were carefully designed in [8], such that the codeword bits with a common constraint in the LDPC code structure are sent over different QAM symbols. It was shown that these interleavers provide a significant performance gain in faded erasure channels by eliminating the weaknesses of the BICM structure. The column-twist interleaver is studied in more detail in [11].
Although the column-twist interleaving effectively avoids performance degradation for the BICM scheme, it requires additional storage and operations. In this paper, by exploiting the permutation equivalence property of linear codes, we propose permutation methods called block permutation for designing an LDPC coded BICM system without the column-twist interleaver, which prevents possible performance degradation in fading or erasure channels. We find new LDPC code descriptions equivalent to the original codes of current DVB standards using the block permutation such that the codeword bits are previously desirably rearranged immediately after LDPC encoding. Because the block permutation is a simple column permutation for a parity check matrix, the permuted codes retain the same error correcting capability as that of the original code in binary input memoryless channels. When combined with high-order modulation in BICM schemes, the codes generated by the block permutation can remain detached from the problem in which multiple dependent bits are sent on a single symbol. We are thus able to solve the problem without the column-twist interleaver, and this leads to a simpler DVB BICM structure.

0018-9316 c 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:46:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JUNE 2015

TABLE I
NUMBER OF COLUMNS Nc ACCORDING TO THE STANDARD, BLOCK LENGTH n, AND MODULATION ORDER M

Fig. 1. Block diagrams of (a) conventional BICM scheme in the DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH standards and (b) new BICM scheme designed using block permutations.
Fig. 2. Example of (a) parity check matrix H and (b) corresponding bipartite graph.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the elements of BICM in the second generation DVB broadcasting standards. In Section III, we propose the employment of permutation equivalent LDPC codes as an alternative to the columntwist interleaver to simplify the BICM structure. An example is then shown in Section IV demonstrating that the proposed method can replace the column-twist interleaver. Finally, Section V presents the conclusions.
II. PRELIMINARIES: BICM SCHEME IN DVB-T2/C2/NGH Second generation DVB transmission standards such as DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH share a similar BICM structure as shown in Fig. 1. The BICM scheme consists of an FEC code, a bit interleaver, and a modulation scheme. The combination of the BCH and LDPC codes provides a supreme error correcting performance, and high-order modulations support high data rate communications for HD broadcasting services. The bit interleaver is composed of several components and is designed so as to eliminate the dependency of the channels experienced by the adjacent codeword bits so that the effective binary channel for transmitting codeword bits becomes memoryless. LDPC codes are a good choice for practical communication systems due to their capacity-approaching performance and possible high parallelism in implementation [7]. Binary LDPC codes are (n, k) linear block codes with k information bits and n codeword bits, and each LDPC code is defined as the null space of a sparse parity check matrix H ∈ {0, 1}(n−k)×n. Given a codeword vector x ∈ {0, 1}n, Hx = 0. The matrix H is represented by a bipartite graph with n variable nodes and (n − k) check nodes. Fig. 2 shows an example of H and its corresponding bipartite graph. The i-th column and the j-th

row of H correspond to the i-th variable node and the j-th check node,

respectively, and they are connected if hji equals one. In the graph, the variable nodes correspond to codeword bits, and the check nodes

are linear binary constraints. For example, in Fig. 2(b), a check node

c2 is connected with four variable nodes v1, v3, v6, and vn, demonstrating that the modulo-2 sum of the corresponding codeword bits

x1, x3, x6, and xn must be zero. The iterative belief-propagation (BP) decoding operates for error correction under such constraints.

All LDPC codes in the second generation DVB standards have a

quasi-cyclic (QC) structure for a decoder with high parallelism [12],

and parity bits are simply generated by irregular repeat accumulate

(IRA) structures [13]. The submatrix for the message part is com-

posed of Q×Q circulant permutation matrices with a size of Q = 360.

Let Sn,r be called a code description for a code with length n and

rate r, which is provided in [2], [5], and [6]. There are

=

k Q

lines

in Sn,r, and let Sni ,r be the i-th line of the description. We assume

that all indices with respect to the LDPC code structure begin from

0, so Sn,r is composed of lines S0n,r, S1n,r, . . . , Sn−,r1. The line Sin,r

determines the (n − k) × Q submatrix, of which the starting column

index is iQ, and we call the submatrix a block. Each block is a vertical

stack

of

q

=

n−k Q

circulant

permutation

matrices.

At the modulator, the encoded bits are mapped to uniform M-QAM

symbols, where M is the modulation order (i.e., number of points on

the constellation). Each M-QAM symbol contains log2 M codeword bits. Before the modulation mapping, the bit sequence is rearranged

by the block interleaver, which has a block memory with Nc columns and Nr = n/Nc rows. The number of columns is determined as an integer multiple of log2 M; that is, Nc = K log2 M, where K is the number of QAM symbols that obtained from a single column of

the block interleaver. In the DVB standards, K equals one or two,

and Table I presents the values of Nc for the DVB systems under consideration, n and M. The codeword bits are sequentially written

column-wise and read out row-wise on the block memory. The out-

put bits of the block interleaver are grouped at the demultiplexer, and

the Nc bits in each group are mapped to a sequence of the constellation points for K symbols. Since the demultiplexing determines the

mapping from the Nc bits to one or two QAM symbols, this can be

regarded as a component interleaver.

In BP decoding over a LDPC graph, if more than two variable

nodes connected to a check node are largely corrupted by deep fading,

erasures, or strong noise, then the check node becomes less efficient

in correcting errors. This problem can be mitigated by the diversity

derived from the presumable independence of the channels experi-

enced by neighbor variable nodes. However, in the BICM structure,

the structural weakness can be exposed if the neighbor variable nodes

of a check node are connected to a modulation symbol. In such a case,

since the neighbor variable nodes are sent over the same QAM sym-

bol, the channel diversity for the check node is reduced and the overall

performance can be degraded. This situation causes inefficiency of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:46:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JUNE 2015 TABLE II
OCCURRENCES OF LCNS IN LDPC CODED BICM IN DVB-T2 LEFT: (n = 16 200. RIGHT: n = 64 800)
TABLE III OCCURRENCES OF LCNS IN LDPC CODED BICM IN
DVB-C2 (LEFT: n = 16 200. RIGHT: n = 64 800)

329
interleaver. For example, in DVB-C2, all codes with n = 64800 combined with 256-QAM (i.e., Nc = 16) result in many LCNs due to QC structures. Thus, an additional operation was required for DVB standards to eliminate LCNs.
Parity and column-twist interleavers were introduced in [8] to eliminate LCNs, and these interleavers were adopted in DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH. First, the parity interleaver transforms the submatrix of the parity part into the same QC structure as that of the preparing step for LCN elimination, and the column-twist interleaver applies an appropriate offset to the start position for each column of the block interleaver. The column-twisting is equivalent to circular shifts in the submatrices of H. The size of each submatrix is n/Nc. Fig. 3(a) shows an example of the column-twist interleaving for the case of Nc = 4 and M = 16, and three submatrices including the parity part are circular-shifted according to predetermined offsets. The offsets are carefully determined in order to avoid LCNs [8], [11]. Note that the column-twist interleaving and de-interleaving are implemented as component operations, and the sets of twisting offsets are specified for different n and M in the DVB standards.

TABLE IV OCCURRENCES OF LCNS IN 16 K LDPC CODED
BICM IN DVB-NGH
the check node, and leads to a delay in decoding convergence and to the performance degradation.
Actually, in broadcasting environments, we should take account of events in which some symbols are erased or corrupted by strong noise or interference. For example, 0-dB echo channels and symbol erasure channels are considered as reference channel models for DVB-T2 single frequency networks [9]. In addition, a reference channel studied for DVB-C2 is composed of several elements: thermal noise, impulse noise, burst noise, and narrow-band interference [10]. In these types of channels, some symbols suffer from exceptionally worse channels than average.
In this respect, we define the less-capable check node (LCN) as a check node of which two or more neighbor codeword bits are conveyed over a single modulation symbol. For example, if two or more codeword bits among x1, x3, x6, and xn in Fig. 2(b) are mapped onto a single 16-QAM symbol, then their common neighbor check node c2 becomes an LCN.
Many LDPC codes in DVB standards generate LCNs when the encoded bits are modulated immediately after block interleaving and demultiplexing. Tables II–IV present LCN occurrences in the LDPC coded BICM in DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH, respectively. The results in the tables are obtained under the BICM structure in Fig. 1(a) without the parity interleaver and the column-twist

III. NEW BICM DESIGN WITH BLOCK PERMUTATION
In this section, methods to avoid LCNs that are more efficient and economical are introduced. First, a graphical representation of the LDPC coded BICM structure is introduced, and the behavior of conventional schemes over this graph is discussed. We then propose another method, ‘block permutation,’ for designing new BICM schemes that replaces the column-twist interleaver.
A. LDPC Coded BICM Graph
As shown in Fig. 2, an LDPC code structure is represented by a bipartite graph. Similarly, we illustrate an entire LDPC coded BICM structure using a tripartite graph as depicted in Fig. 4. We refer to the tripartite graph as an LDPC coded BICM graph. This graph consists of a conventional LDPC bipartite graph, symbol nodes (rounded squares), and additional edges. The new edges connect a variable node and a symbol node, and there is no connection between check nodes and symbol nodes. A symbol node indicates each QAM symbol, and neighbor codeword bits of a symbol node are sent on a single symbol through the channels. Fig. 4 shows the case of 16-QAM, and the degree (number of edges connected to a node) of all symbol nodes is 4.
In the LDPC coded BICM graph, the left-hand side edge connections of variable nodes are described by the LDPC code structure. Especially, Fig. 4 depicts a QC-LDPC code structure with Q = 4 in the left-hand side. As shown in Fig. 2, edge connections between variable nodes and check nodes describe codeword bits and their linear constraints, respectively. On the other hand, the right-side edge connections of the variable nodes are determined by the bit interleaver of the BICM. Every variable node has only one neighbor symbol node, which means that the codeword bits are merely permuted and then mapped to the symbols.
According to our definition, if a check node share two or more neighbor variable nodes with any symbol node, then the check node becomes an LCN. In other words, an LCN contributes to make a length-4 cycle accompanying any symbol node. To eliminate LCNs, edge connections in the LDPC coded BICM graph should be carefully determined so that any combination of a check node and a symbol node does not have more than one common neighbor variable node. We define the LCN-free graph as a graph in which there is no length-4 cycle that includes a check node and a symbol node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:46:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

330

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JUNE 2015

Fig. 3. Illustrations of (a) column-twist interleaving in conventional DVB standards, (b) interblock permutations, and (c) intrablock permutations on a parity check matrix in the DVB-T2/C2 standards (n = 64 800, r = 3/4, Q = 360, q = 45, = 145). While the column-twist interleaving is an actual operation performed at the transmitter and the receiver, the interblock permutation and the intrablock permutations are design procedures used to obtain new encoding descriptions of LDPC codes.

B. LCN Avoidance on LDPC Coded BICM Graph
The LCN avoidance method in conventional DVB standards is a careful design of the right-hand side edge connections with a given fixed left-hand side subgraph. This is used to have the entire graph be LCN-free, i.e., cycle-4 free. In this design, LCNs are avoided by revising the edge connections derived by concatenating the parity interleaver and the column-twist interleaver to the existing block interleaver and demultiplexer. As a result, every combination of modulation and coding scheme in the DVB standards results in an LCN-free graph using a proper column-twist interleaver setting.
Our goal is to propose a new method for avoiding LCNs. This method replaces the column-twist interleaver and provides a simpler implementation. We will briefly describe our approach in terms of the tripartite graph in Fig. 4 and then give further details later.
Let us assume that the right-hand side subgraph is formed by the bit-interleaver composed of all components except the column-twist interleaver and that the left-hand side subgraph is determined by the LDPC code in use. Some LCNs may exist in the entire graph. Instead of modifying the right-hand side graph by applying the column-twist interleaver in order to avoid the LCNs, the code will only be redescribed by applying a coordinate permutation to avoid the LCNs.
First, we unplug the right-hand side edges from the variable node sockets. The terminated right-hand side subgraph is kept intact.

The variable nodes untied from the right-hand side are reordered by a certain permutation maintaining the left-side socket connections. Note that this operation will provide a new permutation-equivalent LDPC code of which the error correcting property is identical to the original since the LDPC graph structure is unchanged. Then, the edges of the intact right-hand side subgraph are plugged in the sockets of the reordered variable nodes, and we check whether or not the new LDPC coded BICM graph is LCN-free. This series of operations is iteratively performed until an LCN-free graph is found.
A new BICM graph is obtained, of which the structure differs from that of the former structure. If the reordering of the variable nodes is adequately performed, the entire set of LCNs can be removed. The benefit of the new structure is that the variable node reordering can be realized by only modifying the code description without changing the encoder implementation.
The reordering of variable nodes needs to be carefully designed so that it effectively removes the existing LCNs. Furthermore, we want to find a single good reordering pattern that has LCN-free combinations with all possible modulation schemes. We develop the method under the following two design constraints.
• Reuse of individually well-designed LDPC codes. • Retention of the QC and IRA structures for the LDPC code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:46:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JUNE 2015

331

Fig. 4. QC-LDPC coded BICM graph showing a set of variable nodes (circles), a set of check nodes (squares), a set of symbol nodes (rounded squares), and a set of edges. The left-hand side edge connections of variable nodes show the LDPC code structure, while the right-hand side edge connections depict bit interleaving.
First, for a fair comparison of the structures, we need to use the code with the same error-correcting capability as that of the code defined in the standards. Second, our aim is to take advantage of the implementation-friendly structures, QC and IRA. Our approach automatically satisfies the first constraint since the variable node ordering will not change the algebraic properties of the code. A reordering or permutation method which also satisfies the second condition needs to be devised. We introduce permutation methods called ‘block permutations’ which make BICM graphs satisfying the second constraint in the following subsection. Note that the ‘block permutation’ is distinguished from the ‘block interleaving’, which is an actual component of the BICM structure.
C. LCN Avoidance Via Block Permutation
The block permutations are permutation methods applied to the blocks of the parity check matrix with the QC structure. Note that a block permutation is equivalent to a variable node permutation. We propose two types of block permutations for avoiding LCNs: inter-block and intra-block. The inter-block permutation reorders the blocks of the message part of the parity check matrix where the relative order of the columns within a block is not changed, while the intra-block permutation applies a circular shift to each block in the message part.
Since the QC and IRA structures are maintained, we can continue to use the same encoder for generating the codewords corresponding to the new modified code. Let Sˆ n,r be a new encoding description designed by applying the proper block permutations to the existing encoding description Sn,r. The identical encoding is applied to Sˆ n,r because the QC structure in the message part and the IRA structure in the parity part have been retained.
As previously mentioned, our main goal is to find a single new LDPC code description that is free of LCNs in combination with all modulation schemes. We will now explain how to remove the LCNs

with the block permutations. First, we start with the parity check
matrix Hn,r of an original encoding description Sn,r, as provided in [2], [5], and [6]. Parity interleaving needs to be applied since the
message and parity parts must have the same QC structure to ease the design for LCN avoidance. Let H¯ n,r denote a parity check matrix of which the submatrix of the parity part is rearranged by parity interleaving. We then reorder the columns in H¯ n,r so that no LCN occurs for all modulation schemes with different Nc (see Table I) considered. The parity part should be protected unchanged. After
finding a modified parity check matrix that does not create LCNs, a corresponding encoding description Sˆ n,r is derived from the matrix.
1) LCN Avoidance Via Inter-Block Permutation: As depicted in
Fig. 3(b), the inter-block permutation is a block-wise permutation that blocks of the size (n − k) × Q are exchanged. Let π(i) be the
inter-block permutation order of the i-th block, and the reordering of blocks of the parity check matrix are determined by π(i). Let hj and hˆ j denote the j-th column vector of an original parity check matrix H and that of a resulting block permuted parity check matrix Hˆ ,
respectively. Then,

hˆ π(p)Q+r = hj,

(1)

where p =

j Q

and r = j mod Q. Only the blocks in the message

part are permuted, and for the parity part, i ≥ , π(i) = i. We will

then obtain a new encoding description Sˆ n,r, where Sˆ πn,(ri) = Sni ,r.

We place a design constraint such that the variable node degree

profile of the resulting code should be the same as that of the original

code, because the demultiplexer has been designed considering the

degree profile and because any change in the degree profile may

require a modification of the demultiplexer. A good reordering pattern

can be found by even a simple trial and error approach.

Table V shows an example of an inter-block permutation description Sˆ 16200,1/2 for DVB-T2/C2 is given. As shown in the table, the
lines are simply reordered compared to the original description, and

this description results in LCN-free BICM structures for all modula-

tion schemes considered. While proper inter-block permutations for

short codes with n = 16200 are easy to find in all DVB standards,

for some long codes with n = 64800, a suitable pattern of inter-block

permutations is not easily obtained by a simple brute-force search.

2) LCN Avoidance Via Intra-Block Permutation: Intra-block per-

mutation is a more effective method than inter-block permutation.

Within each block in the message part, columns (variable nodes) are

circularly shifted according to a proper offset as depicted in Fig. 3(c).

Let ti be an intra-block permutation offset for the i-th block; the Q columns of the i-th block are then circular-shifted to the right by ti units. Therefore,

hˆ pQ+u = hj,

(2)

where p =

j Q

and u = (j mod Q + tp) mod Q.

The intra-block permutation is equivalent to the additions of con-

stant offset values to each line of Sn,r. According to the property

of the encoding in the DVB standards, if we cyclically shift col-

umn vectors in the i-th block to the right by ti units, then −tiq is added to all elements in Sni ,r. Here, the additions are operated under modulo (n − k). Using the derived encoding description directly, we

find the intra-block permutation offsets by a simple search algorithm.

Pseudo-codes in Algorithm 1 describe the design of a new encoding description Sˆ n,r from Sn,r with intra-block permutations.
Table V also shows intra-block permuted encoding description of

our running example, and the offset tiq = 25ti is added to all elements in some lines. The resulting code leads to LCN-free BICM

structures for all modulation schemes. As a matter of course, this

block permutation does not break the QC and the IRA structure of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:46:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

332

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JUNE 2015

TABLE V EXAMPLES OF ENCODING DESCRIPTIONS OBTAINED BY INTERBLOCK AND INTRABLOCK PERMUTATIONS (DVB-T2/C2, n = 16 200, r = 1/2)

Algorithm 1 Intrablock Permutation Design

for i = 1 to do Sˆ in,r ← (Sni ,r − tiq + (n − k)) mod (n − k) (ti is a circular shift offset, and 0 ≤ ti < Q)
end for Construct a parity check matrix H with Sˆ in,r, i = 1, 2, . . . , q Rearrange H by parity interleaving, and then obtain H¯

for all Nc considered do

Divide H¯ Calculate

into Q=

Nc submatrices H¯ 1 + H¯ 2 + · · ·

H¯ 1, H¯ 2, + H¯ Nc

.

.

.

,

H¯ Nc

if there is a value greater than 1 in Q then

Go back to the beginning of the algorithm

end if

end for Obtain Sˆ in,r for i = 1, . . . , as a new encoding description

the parity check matrices, and the column-twist interleaver can be omitted.
The main advantage of the intra-block permutation compared to the inter-block permutation is a greater degree of freedom in design. While the number of all possible inter-block permutations is less than ( )!, we may consider Q patterns of intra-block permutations to choose a proper permutation. Furthermore, the aim of the inter-block permutation search is to find a solution to a complex combinatorial problem of blocks, whereas the aim of the intra-block permutation search is to solve a set of independent problems within each individual block. Therefore, it is easier to find appropriate encoding descriptions by using intra-block permutations than by using inter-block permutations. As a result, for all codes in the DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH standards, we have found modified encoding descriptions that do not generate any LCN in the BICM graph in combination with the subsequent block interleavers, demuliplexers, and QAMs.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we show that the new BICM schemes do not cause performance degradation compared to conventional DVB standards. We consider the Rayleigh faded erasure channel modeled in [8],

Fig. 5. BER curves of a DVB-T2/C2 LDPC code (n = 64 800, r = 3/4) over Rayleigh faded erasure channel with erasure probability = 0.18.

where the harmful effect of LCNs is noticeable. Given n codeword bits, n/log2 M QAM symbols are generated at the encoder. Let xi be the i-th transmitted symbol through the channel with white Gaussian noise power σ 2, and the corresponding received symbol is
then given as

yi = hieixi + zi,

(3)

where hi ∼ CN (0, 1), zi ∼ CN (0, σ 2), and ei is a discrete random v√ariable with probability mass function (pmf) pE(0) = and pE(1/ 1 − ) = 1 − . For each symbol, hi, zi, and ei are independently generated from the respective distributions. We assume that perfect channel state information is available at the receiver, i.e., the receiver knows the exact values of hiei for all i.
Bit error rates (BERs) of three different schemes for an LDPC code (n = 64800, r = 3/4) in DVB-T2/C2 are compared. In the first scheme, a code is constructed based on the conventional encoding description in [2] and [5], but parity and column-twist interleavers are not employed. The second scheme is the conventional DVB-T2/C2 BICM

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:46:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 2, JUNE 2015

333

with the parity and column-twist interleaver corresponding to the current standards. The third scheme is a new BICM with an encoding description obtained by intra-block permutations and without the column-twist interleaver.
The resulting BER curves are shown in Fig. 5. For the three modulation schemes (16-QAM, 64-QAM, and 256-QAM), it is verified that the new BICM with the LDPC code designed by block permutations achieves the same gain although the column-twist interleaver is not exploited. Therefore, with new encoding descriptions, the BICM system structure in the DVB standards is simplified, and it is not necessary to store the sets of twisting parameters for different modulation and coding schemes.
V. CONCLUSIONS
For QC-LDPC codes in second generation DVB standards, a new code description via block permutation methods was proposed to achieve the same BICM gain as that of column-twist interleaving. Two different block permutations, inter-block and intra-block permutations, were introduced, and it was demonstrated that the intra-block permutation is an effective way to design LCN-free BICM graphs. By using intra-block permutations, proper modification of LDPC parity check matrices was achieved for all codes, modulation and coding schemes in the DVB-T2, DVB-C2, and DVB-NGH standards. This enabled a simplification of the BICM structure with no performance degradation compared to the conventional schemes.
REFERENCES
[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications (DVB-S2), ETSI Standard 302 307 V1.3.1, Mar. 2013.

[2] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI Standard 302 755 V1.3.1, Apr. 2012.
[3] L. Vangelista et al., “Key technologies for next-generation terrestrial digital television standard DVB-T2,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 146–153, Oct. 2009.
[4] I. Eizmendi et al., “DVB-T2: The second generation of terrestrial digital video broadcasting system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 258–271, Jun. 2014.
[5] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Transmission System for Cable Systems (DVB-C2), ETSI Standard 302 769 V1.2.1, Apr. 2011.
[6] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Next Generation Broadcasting System to handheld, Physical Layer Specification (DVB-NGH), DVB Document Standard A160, Nov. 2012.
[7] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[8] T. Yokokawa, M. Kan, S. Okada, and L. Sakai, “Parity and column twist interleaver for DVB-T2 LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Relat. Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2008, pp. 123–127.
[9] I. Eizmendi et al., “DVB-T2 performance in presence of multipath laboratory tests,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast. (BMSB), Nuremberg, Germany, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[10] “ReDeSign: HFC channel model, deliverable 08,” Res. Develop. Future Interact. Gener. Hybrid Fiber Coax Netw. (ReDeSign), Gurgaon, India, Tech. Rep. 217014, Dec. 2008.
[11] M. Boukesse, B. Moeyaert, S. Bette, and P. Mégret, “Analysis of the twisting parameters in the DVB-T2 column-twist interleaver,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Commun. Veh. Tech. Benelux (SCVT), Enschede, The Netherlands, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[12] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894–2901, Aug. 2005.
[13] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, 2000, pp. 1–8.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:46:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

