6942

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

Efficient Algorithm for Finding Dominant Trapping Sets of LDPC Codes
Mehdi Karimi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents an efficient algorithm for finding the dominant trapping sets of a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code. The algorithm can be used to estimate the error floor of LDPC codes or as a tool to design LDPC codes with low error floors. For regular codes, the algorithm is initiated with a set of short cycles as the input. For irregular codes, in addition to short cycles, variable nodes with low degree and cycles with low approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) are also used as the initial inputs. The initial inputs are then expanded recursively to dominant trapping sets of increasing size. At the core of the algorithm lies the analysis of the graphical structure of dominant trapping sets and the relationship of such structures to short cycles, low-degree variable nodes, and cycles with low ACE. The algorithm is universal in the sense that it can be used for an arbitrary graph and that it can be tailored to find a variety of graphical objects, such as absorbing sets and Zyablov–Pinsker trapping sets, known to dominate the performance of LDPC codes in the error floor region over different channels and for different iterative decoding algorithms. Simulation results on several LDPC codes demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of the proposed algorithm. In particular, the algorithm is significantly faster than the existing search algorithms for dominant trapping sets.
Index Terms—Absorbing sets, approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE), dominant trapping sets, elementary trapping sets, error floor, error floor estimation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, short cycles, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
E STIMATING the error floor performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under iterative message-passing decoding, and the design of LDPC codes with low error floors have attracted a great amount of interest in recent years. The performance of LDPC codes under iterative decoding algorithms in the error floor region is closely related to the structure of the code’s Tanner graph. For the binary erasure channel (BEC), the problematic structures are stopping sets [8]. In the case of the binary symmetric channel (BSC) and the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, the error-prone patterns are called trapping sets [26], near codewords [21], or pseudocodewords [35]. Among the trapping
Manuscript received February 01, 2011; revised March 29, 2012; accepted June 18, 2012. Date of publication August 03, 2012; date of current version October 16, 2012. This paper was presented in part at the 6th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing, Brest, France, September 6–10, 2010, and in part at the 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada (e-mail: mkarimi@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Communicated by P. O. Vontobel, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2205663

sets, the so-called elementary trapping sets are shown to be the main culprits [5], [13], [14], [23], [26], [44]. Related to this, it is demonstrated in [6] and [7] that for some structured LDPC codes decoded by iterative algorithms over the AWGN channel, a subset of trapping sets, called absorbing sets, determine the error floor performance. In fact, in an overwhelmingly large number of cases, the dominant1 absorbing sets appear to be elementary trapping sets.
For a given LDPC code, the knowledge of the dominant trapping sets is important. On the one hand, efficient methods for estimating the error floor of an LDPC code, which rely on the importance sampling technique, operate by biasing the noise toward the dominant trapping sets of the code; see, e.g., [5]. On the other hand, by knowing the dominant trapping sets, several decoder modifications can be applied to improve the error floor performance (see, e.g., [3] and [9]). Furthermore, the knowledge of dominant trapping sets can be used to design LDPC codes with low error floor. Related to this, Ivkovic et al. [12] applied the technique of edge swapping between two copies of a base LDPC code to eliminate the dominant trapping sets of the base code over the BSC. This was then generalized by Asvadi et al. [1] to cyclic liftings of higher degree to construct quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with low error floor. While the knowledge of the problematic sets that dominate the error floor performance is most helpful in the design and analysis of LDPC codes, attaining such knowledge, regardless of differences in the graphical structure of these sets, is a hard problem. For instance, it was shown in [17], [20], and [24] that the problem of finding a minimum size stopping set is NP hard. McGregor and Milenkovic [20] showed that not only the problem of finding a minimum size trapping set, but also the problem of approximating the size of such a trapping set is NP hard, regardless of the sparsity of the underlying graph.
It should be noted that while the majority of the literature on estimating the error floor of LDPC codes relies on finding the dominant trapping sets, as an eventual result of decoder failure, in [39]–[41] Xiao and Banihashemi took a different approach. By focussing on the input error patterns that cause the decoder to fail, they developed a simple technique to estimate the frame error rate (FER) and the bit error rate (BER) of finite-length LDPC codes over the BSC [39]. The complexity of this technique was then reduced in [41], and the estimation technique was extended to the AWGN channel with quantized output in [40]. In this study, unlike [39]–[41], we are particularly inter-
1In the existing literature, the term “dominant” has sometimes been used with a formal mathematical definition (see, e.g., [30, Definition 4]). In this paper, however, the term “dominant” is used rather informally to indicate the trapping or the absorbing sets that are relatively more harmful to the error floor performance.

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: EFFICIENT ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES

6943

ested in the examination of the graphical structure of the prob-

lematic sets which dominate the error floor performance. This

information is then used to efficiently search for these sets.

The complexity of the exhaustive brute-force search method

for finding problematic structures of size in a code of length

becomes quickly infeasible as and increase. Efficient search

algorithms have been devised to find small (dominant) stop-

ping and trapping sets [2], [5], [18], [29], [37], [38], [41]. The

reach of these algorithms, however, is still very limited. For ex-

ample, the complexity of the algorithm in [37] and [38] is only

affordable for codes with lengths up to

. Even for these

lengths, the algorithm can only find trapping sets of maximum

size 11 with only one or two unsatisfied check nodes. This is

while for many codes, some of the dominant trapping sets may

have larger size and/or more than two unsatisfied check nodes.

In [34] and [25], the authors proposed to build a database of all

possible configurations for trapping sets of different sizes in a

graph with specific degree distribution and girth. They then used

a parent–child relationship between the trapping sets of different

sizes to simplify the search of the larger trapping sets. This

method was used to find the dominant trapping sets of left-reg-

ular LDPC codes with left degree 3 [34]. The method proposed

in [34], however, becomes very complex when the degree of

variable nodes, and in turn the number of possible configura-

tions, increases. The application of this method becomes even

more difficult when dealing with irregular LDPC codes as for

such codes, there may be a large number of possible configura-

tions for each type of trapping set, due to the variety of variable

node degrees. Even for the left-regular graphs with small left

degrees, the number of possible configurations becomes quite

large for the larger trapping sets. It is, therefore, important to

look for more efficient algorithms to find the problematic struc-

tures that dominate the error floor performance of LDPC codes.

In this paper, we study the problematic graphical structures

that dominate the error floor performance of LDPC codes, col-

lectively referred to as trapping sets, and demonstrate that they

all contain at least one short cycle (with a small exception of

some of the trapping sets of irregular LDPC codes with degree-2

variable nodes). By examining the relationships between cycles

and trapping sets, we devise an efficient algorithm to find dom-

inant trapping sets of an LDPC code. The algorithm is initiated

by a set of short cycles as input. Each cycle is then expanded

recursively to trapping sets of increasing size in a conservative

fashion, i.e., the expanded sets all have the smallest size larger

than the size of the current set, and each of them will be used

as a new input to the next step of the algorithm. It should be

mentioned that although our algorithm uses the topological re-

lationships between the small trapping sets and the larger ones,

it is different from the method of [34] in several ways. Our al-

gorithm is not based on the knowledge of the exact structure

of trapping sets, and hence does not need to build a database.

In fact, instead of checking all the possible configurations to

find the existing ones in a graph, it directly and efficiently finds

those existing configurations, and so it is much faster. Moreover,

unlike the method in [34], our algorithm uses a general frame-

work for all the degree distributions and girths (with a small

exception of some of the trapping sets of irregular LDPC codes

with degree-2 variable nodes). The proposed algorithm is ap-

plicable to any Tanner graph (structured or random) and can be tailored to find a variety of graphical structures, such as elementary trapping sets and absorbing sets among others. For structured graphs, such as those of quasi-cyclic or protograph codes, one can use the existing automorphisms in the graph to further simplify the search. Results on several LDPC codes verify the high efficiency and accuracy of the algorithm. For example, for the tested codes, the search speed is improved by a factor of 10 to 100 compared to the methods in [2] and [5].
It is important to note that although the proposed algorithm has many strengths including universality, high efficiency, and high accuracy, it also has some limitations. The main limitation is the lack of a guarantee that the algorithm can find all the problematic structures of a certain size or class in a general setting. In special cases, such as those involving regular graphs, however, the proposed algorithm is guaranteed to find all the problematic structures of certain sizes and/or classes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. In Section III, we develop the proposed algorithm. Section IV presents the modification needed for irregular LDPC codes. Section V includes some numerical results. Section VI concludes this paper.

II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

Let

be the bipartite graph, or Tanner graph,

corresponding to the LDPC code , where is the set of variable

nodes, is the set of check nodes and is the set of edges.

The notations and refer to “left” and “right,” respectively,

pointing to the side of the bipartite graph where variable nodes

and check nodes are located, respectively. The degree of a node

is denoted by . For a subset

,

denotes the set of neighbors of in . The induced subgraph of

, represented by , is the graph containing nodes

with edges

. The set of check

nodes in

with odd degree in

is denoted by

.

Similarly,

represents the set of check nodes in

with

even degree in

. The subgraph resulting from removing

the nodes of

and their edges from

is denoted by

. In this paper, we use the terms satisfied check nodes and

unsatisfied check nodes to refer to the check nodes in

and

, respectively. Given a Tanner graph

,

the following objects play an important role in the error floor

performance of the corresponding LDPC code.

Definition 1:

i) A set

is an

trapping set if

and

. The integer is referred to as the size of the

trapping set .

ii) An

trapping set is called elementary if all the

check nodes in

have degree 1 or 2.

iii) A set

is an

absorbing set if is an

trapping set and if all the nodes in are connected to

more nodes in

than to nodes in

.

iv) A set

is an

fully absorbing set if is an

absorbing set and if all the nodes in

have strictly

more neighbors in

than in

.

v) A set

is a -out trapping set [37] if

contains

exactly nodes of degree 1 in

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6944

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

Fig. 2. Induced subgraph of a trapping set.

Fig. 1. Lollipop walks of length 7.

dominant trapping sets (of regular LDPC codes) in the litera-

vi) Let

be a left-regular bipartite graph with

left degree . A set

is a Zyablov–Pinsker (ZP)

trapping set [20] if every node of is connected to less

than

nodes in

.

The ZP trapping sets are the trapping sets of the ZP bit-flip-

ping algorithm [45] over the BSC [20]. Moreover, for odd values

of , the definitions of ZP trapping sets and absorbing sets are

identical.

It is important to note that Definitions 1(ii)–1(vi) are all spe-

cial cases of a trapping set in Definition 1(i). In the rest of

ture have the property that every variable node is connected to at least two satisfied check nodes in the induced subgraph. We, thus, focus on trapping sets with this property except for irregular LDPC codes, where we relax this condition for degree-2 variable nodes. As an example, the subgraph in Fig. 2 does not satisfy this condition. (Variable nodes and check nodes are represented by circles and squares, respectively.) Removal of node
and its edges, however, makes the subgraph satisfy the condition. The following lemma proves this property for certain absorbing and ZP trapping sets.

this paper, therefore, we collectively refer to them as trapping

sets. Distinctions will be made as necessary. Trapping sets with

smaller values of and are generally believed to be more

harmful to iterative decoding. Loosely speaking, such trapping

sets are called dominant. To measure how harmful a trapping

set really is, one can use techniques such as importance sam-

pling [5] to measure the contribution of the trapping set to the

error floor. This contribution and the dominance of a trapping

set (compared to others) also depend on the channel model and

the iterative decoding algorithm, as well as the detailed struc-

ture of the Tanner graph (not just the values of and ).

In a graph

with the set of nodes and the set

of edges , a lollipop walk of length is defined as a sequence

of nodes

in such that

are dis-

tinct,

for some

, and

for all

Lemma 1: Suppose that

is an absorbing set (ZP trap-

ping set) in

, and that for all variable nodes

, we have

(

). Then, each variable node

is connected to at least two satisfied check nodes in .

Proof: The proof follows from the definition of absorbing

and ZP trapping sets.

For small trapping sets, which dominate the error floor performance, it is unlikely to see check nodes of degree larger than 2 in their subgraphs, i.e., most of the dominant trapping sets are elementary [5], [26]. Related to this, almost all the trapping sets reported as the dominant trapping sets of practical LDPC codes are elementary. In fact, it can be shown that the sizes of nonelementary trapping sets for left-regular graphs are generally larger than those of elementary ones (cf., Lemma 7 in Appendix A).

. Fig. 1 shows two lollipop walks of length 7. The

lollipop walk in Fig. 1(a) is represented as

.

A cycle can be considered as a special lollipop walk if the defi-

nition is extended to

. The length of the shortest cycle in

a graph is denoted by and is called the girth of .

Example 1: Consider left-regular LDPC codes with left degree 4 and girths 6, 8, and 10. Such codes can have elementary trapping sets of size 5, 8, and 17, respectively. The lower bounds on the sizes of nonelementary trapping sets with less than three unsatisfied check nodes and with at least one satis-

fied check node of degree larger than 2 in , for these codes,

III. DEVELOPMENT OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
In this section, we develop the proposed algorithm, and discuss its strengths and limitations. We start by a careful examination of the structure of dominant trapping sets followed by the detailed description and the pseudocode of the proposed search algorithm. We then discuss the strengths and limitations of the algorithm in finding the dominant trapping sets. We continue this section with discussions on the inputs of the algorithm (initial trapping sets) as well as on its computational complexity and memory requirements. The section is ended with modifications required for the algorithm to search for nonelementary trapping sets.

are, however, 7, 14, and 22, respectively (based on Lemma 7 in

Appendix A, and by choosing

). Moreover, for the same

conditions, the minimum sizes of nonelementary trapping sets

with at least one unsatisfied check node of degree larger than

1 in

(and without satisfied check nodes of degree larger

than 2 in

) are at least 5, 11, and 17, respectively.

In the following, we develop our search algorithm mainly for

elementary trapping sets, and then present simple modifications

to tailor the algorithm to find nonelementary trapping sets.

In the rest of this paper, we use the notation to denote the

set of all trapping sets in a graph whose induced subgraph

is connected and for which every node

is connected

to at least two nodes in

. It should be noted that contains

A. Graphical Structure of Trapping Sets

both elementary and nonelementary trapping sets. Notation is used for the set of all elements in with size and denotes

Without loss of generality, we assume that the induced sub- the set of all elements in that contain the set . Naturally,

graph of a trapping set is connected. Disconnected trapping sets denotes the set of all elements in of size that contain the set

can be considered as the union of connected ones. Moreover, to . In the following, we also assume that the Tanner graph has

the best of our knowledge, almost all the structures reported as no parallel edges and no node of degree less than 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: EFFICIENT ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES

6945

because otherwise, all the other nodes in

can be removed

and we will end up with an elementary trapping set of size

in , which is in contradiction with the assumption of

the lemma.

Now suppose that there are at least three connections between

the variable nodes in

and

. Based on the discussion

in the previous paragraph, this means that there are at least three

variable nodes in

each with a single connection to a dif-

ferent check node in

. If

is not connected, then

one can remove one of its components and obtain an elemen-

tary trapping set of size smaller than , which results in a

contradiction. If

is connected, then one can find the

shortest paths in

between every two variable nodes of

that are connected to

, and among them select the

one with the least number of nodes. By keeping the nodes on the

Fig. 3. Possible expansions of an elementary trapping set to a larger elemen- selected path and removing all the other nodes in

, one can

tary trapping set . (Unsatisfied check nodes of

are not shown.)

then obtain an elementary trapping set of size smaller than ,

which is again a contradiction. We, therefore, conclude that the

B. Expansion of Elementary Trapping Sets

number of connections between the variable nodes in

and

must be strictly less than 3.

The main idea of the proposed algorithm is to start from a For the case that

is connected to exactly two nodes in

relatively small set of small elementary trapping sets, which are

, there must be two different variable nodes and of

easy to enumerate, and then recursively expand them to larger

corresponding to those connections. Also, there must be

elementary trapping sets. To achieve this, we first characterize no cycles in

. Otherwise, one can remove all the vari-

the expansion of an elementary trapping set to a larger elemen- able nodes on the cycle except those on the shortest path be-

tary trapping set through the following lemmas.

tween and , and obtain an elementary trapping set larger

Lemma 2: Let be an elementary trapping set of size in

. Then for each elementary trapping set

(if any),

the variable node in

is only connected to unsatisfied check

nodes of (i.e., to the check nodes in

).

Proof: If the node in

is connected to any satisfied

check nodes of , then will have unsatisfied check nodes in

connected to three variable nodes of . This contradicts

being an elementary trapping set.

than but smaller than . This contradicts the lemma’s as-

sumption. Fig. 3(b) is an example of the case where

is

connected to exactly two nodes in

.

The proof for the case with one connection is similar

and omitted. Fig. 3(c) is an example of this case, where the

expansion of the set is through a lollipop walk. In both

Fig. 3(b) and (c), the dashed line indicates that more variable

and check nodes can be part of the chain.

Fig. 3(a) depicts an example of the set discussed in Lemma

2. (It should be noted that in all the configurations of Fig. 3,

including Fig. 3(a), unsatisfied check nodes of

are not

shown.)

Lemma 4: Suppose that

is

the sorted set of sizes of the elementary trapping sets in in

increasing order and that

. Let be an elementary

trapping set of size in . If the girth of the graph is larger than

4, then for each elementary trapping set

(if any),

Lemma 3: Suppose that

is the only possible configuration for

is that of Fig. 3(b),

the sorted set of sizes of the elementary trapping sets in in described in Lemma 3, with only two variable nodes in . If

increasing order, where is the maximum size of such trap- the girth is 4, then the only possible configurations are those in

ping sets. Let be an elementary trapping set of size in . If Fig. 3(b) (with only two variable nodes in ), (d), and (e).

, then for each elementary trapping set

Proof: The proof is similar to that of Lemma 3 and is

(if any), the set

is connected to zero satisfied check nodes omitted.

of (i.e., nodes in

) and to only one or two unsatisfied

check nodes of (i.e., nodes in

). If the set

is con- C. Proposed Algorithm

nected to two nodes in

, then there is no cycle in

. The basic idea behind the proposed algorithm is to construct

If the set

is connected to only one node in

, then larger elementary trapping sets by expanding smaller ones.

there is exactly one cycle in

.

More precisely, given an elementary trapping set of size

Proof: If any variable node in

is connected to

, at the input, the algorithm finds all the elementary trapping sets

then

contains satisfied check nodes of degree 4 or higher,

containing , with the property that their size

is the

or unsatisfied check nodes of degree greater than 1. Both are in smallest size greater than . The algorithm then continues by

contradiction with being an elementary trapping set.

using the sets found in the current step as the inputs to the next

Since is an elementary trapping set, there cannot be more step and finds the next set of larger elementary trapping sets.

than one connection between each node of

and the nodes Each step of the algorithm is performed by using Lemmas 2–4.

in . To see this, consider a node

which is con- The pseudocode for one step of the proposed algorithm is given

nected to

. Node can have only one connection to

in Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6946

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

Algorithm 1: Expansion of input elementary trapping sets to

larger ones of size up to with the number of unsatisfied check

nodes up to in

. ( and are the lists

of input and output trapping sets, respectively.)

1: Inputs: , , and .

2: Initialization:

.

3: repeat

4: Select an element of and denote it as .

Fig. 4. Example of a

trapping set (satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes

are shown by empty and full squares, respectively).

5: Construct a new graph by removing all the nodes in , their adjacent edges and their neighbors from .

6:

and

.

7: for each node in

do

8: Examine the neighborhood of in one layer at a

time and to the maximum of layers in search for paths

with

variable nodes between and the other nodes

of

, and lollipop walks with

variable nodes

starting from .

9: Denote as the set of all such paths/lollipop walks of shortest length (if any).

Fig. 5. Example explaining that the algorithm cannot find all the elementary trapping sets containing a specific elementary trapping set.

has negligible effect on the ability of the algorithm to find

the larger trapping sets

with small values of . This is

explained in the following example.

10: if

then

11:

.

12:

.

13: else

14:

.

15: end if

16: end for

17: for each element in do

18:

.

19: if (

) and (

20:

.

21: end if

) then

Example 2: Consider the

trapping set , shown in

Fig. 4. This set belongs to and contains four trapping sets

of size 6, all also in . These four trapping sets can each be

obtained by removing one of the nodes , , , or . As a

result, we have

,

,

, or

trapping sets,

respectively. Among these trapping sets, the

ones have a

smaller number of unsatisfied check nodes. Starting from each

of these two trapping sets, Algorithm 1 finds . Hence, ignoring

the

(or even

and

) trapping set(s) does not

impair the ability of the algorithm to find .

Remark 3: Based on Lemmas 2–4, it can be proved that

starting from an

elementary trapping set , Algorithm 1

will find all the

elementary trapping sets of the smallest

size larger than that contain (this requires the removal

of the condition

in Line 19). Note that this does

not imply that by the recursive application of Algorithm 1 one

can obtain all the elementary trapping sets containing . The

following example demonstrates this.

22: end for

Example 3: Consider the

elementary trapping

23: until all the elements of 24: Output: .

are selected.

set

in Fig. 5. Assume

that Algorithm 1 starts from the elementary trapping set

. Using this input, the output of the al-

Remark 1: Note that in Line 5 of Algorithm 1, all the satisfied

check nodes in

, i.e., the set

, and their neighboring

variable nodes are removed from the graph. This is because,

based on Lemmas 2–4, such nodes cannot be part of the expan-

sion of an elementary trapping set.

gorithm is

. By subsequent applications of

the algorithm, the next outputs are

and

, respectively. This means that the

algorithm does not find the trapping set , although contains

. (It is, however, easy to see that if the algorithm starts from

the set

, it will find .)

Remark 2: In Line 19 of the algorithm, the threshold value In fact, the sufficient condition for the algorithm to find a

on the number of unsatisfied check nodes is needed to keep trapping set of size , starting with one of its subsets of

the complexity of the overall search algorithm, which involves size

, is that has at least one subset in for all

multiple applications of Algorithm 1, low. A proper choice of

, where is defined in Lemma 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: EFFICIENT ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES

6947

The following example shows that despite the limitation ex-

plained in Remark 3 and Example 3, for many cases, the pro-

posed algorithm in fact finds (in a guaranteed fashion) all the

trapping sets

with and up to certain values.

Example 4: For a left-regular graph with left degree 4 and

girth larger than 4, initiating the proposed algorithm with the set

of cycles of length and , one can guarantee to find all the

elementary trapping sets of size less than 9 with less than five

unsatisfied check nodes. This can be seen by the inspection of all

the possible structures for such trapping sets and verifying that

for each structure, the removal of only one variable node will

result in another trapping set in . Subsequent removals of such

nodes from an

elementary trapping set with

and

in , thus, results in a sequence of embedded elementary

trapping sets in , each with size only one less than that of its

parent. The sequence will always end with a cycle of length or

. This implies that all such trapping sets satisfy the sufficient

condition, mentioned earlier, for being found by the algorithm

starting from a cycle of length or

.

Similar results to those of Example 4 can be found for other

left-regular graphs. For irregular graphs however, it is very dif-

ficult to provide such guarantees. This is due to the fact that the

number of possible structures for a trapping set of a given size

could be very large in this case.

Remark 4: For irregular LDPC codes, the variable nodes with large degrees cannot be part of small trapping sets. This is formulated in the following lemma.

Lemma 5: In a graph with girth

, if an

set contains a variable node of degree

.

Proof: The proof is provided in Appendix B.

trapping , then

cycles. Short cycles are also easy to enumerate [41]. We thus use short cycles as the initial inputs to the proposed algorithm. The following lemma provides more justifications for this choice.

Lemma 6:

i) In a left-regular graph with left degree

, if the

induced subgraph

of an

trapping set does

not contain any cycle, then

. The in-

equality is satisfied with equality for elementary trapping

sets.

ii) The variable nodes in any shortest cycle (of length ) of

a Tanner graph form an elementary trapping set.

iii) Let be the set of all trapping sets of a graph , whose

induced subgraph

is connected and for which every

node

is connected to at least two nodes in

(see Section II for the definition of

). Then for every

, its induced subgraph

contains at least one

cycle.

iv) Suppose that

is an absorbing set of a left-regular

Tanner graph

with left node degrees at

least 2. Then,

contains at least one cycle.

v) Suppose that

is a ZP trapping set of a Tanner graph

with node degrees at least 3. Then,

contains at least one cycle.

Proof: The proof of Part (i) is provided in Appendix C. The

proofs for Parts (ii) and (iii) are simple and thus omitted. Parts

(iv) and (v) follow from Lemma 1 and Part (iii).

It can be shown that Part (i) of Lemma 6 can be generalized to

the case where the variable node degree distribution is irregular.

In this case, the result is modified as

, where

is the average degree of variable nodes in . The following

example, based on Part (i) of Lemma 6, demonstrates that cycle-

free

trapping sets have relatively large values of .

Based on Lemma 5, for example, for an irregular Tanner graph

with girth larger than 4, a variable node of degree 15 cannot par-

ticipate in an

trapping set with

and

. Such

results can be used to simplify the algorithm by removing the

large degree variable nodes and their edges from the graph.

Example 5: For a left-regular graph with left degree 4, any

cycle-free

trapping set satisfies

. Such large

values of for a given would imply that the

trapping

set is not dominant.2

Our simulation results indicate that for denser graphs, the

Remark 5: It is easy to see that for the left-regular graphs with left degree 3 or 4, all the trapping sets found by Algorithm 1 are ZP trapping sets. For the left-regular graphs with left degree 3, the obtained trapping sets are also absorbing sets.

Remark 6: Our simulations for many practical LDPC codes

show that in almost all the cases

, where is the

size of the initial elementary trapping set and is the size of

the smallest elementary trapping set containing the initial one.

In the following, we discuss the selection of the initial set of

elementary trapping sets.

set of short cycles of length , or and

, where is

the girth, is sufficient to find almost all the small (with, say,

) dominant trapping sets. In this case, adding short cycles

of larger lengths to the input set has negligible effect on the per-

formance of the algorithm, while increasing its complexity. For

example, we examined a number of randomly constructed codes

with rates larger than 0.4. The codes had block length 1000 and

left-regular Tanner graphs with left degree 5 and girth 6. In all

cases, the trapping sets obtained by Algorithm 1 using cycles of

length 6 and 8 as the input set were identical to those obtained

by using cycles of length 6, 8, and 10 as the input set.

D. Initial Set of Trapping Sets

For sparser graphs, however, one may need to use short cycles

of larger lengths (e.g., ,

, and

) as the initial set.

One of the graphical objects that plays an important role in

the structure of trapping sets is a cycle. Tian et al. [33] showed that every stopping set includes the variable nodes of at least one cycle. Related to this, the induced graph of the support of a pseudocodeword always contains at least one cycle [15]. In

E. Complexity of the Algorithm
The complexity of the algorithm is highly dependent on the short cycle distribution of the graph, which itself is mostly a

[5], [41], and [44], it was shown that an overwhelming majority

2For dominant trapping sets, the value of is usually close to, or smaller than,

of dominant trapping (absorbing) sets are combinations of short the value of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6948

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

function of the degree distribution of the graph (code) [16]. As

a result, in general, the complexity increases much faster with

the increase in the average variable and check node degrees of

the graph than it does with increasing the block length. To have

a more detailed analysis of the complexity of Algorithm 1, we

note that the total complexity can be divided into two parts:

finding the initial input set and expanding the input set to

larger trapping sets.

Regarding the complexity of Part , assuming that an ex-

haustive brute-force search is used to find cycles of length ,

say for

, the complexity is

, for

a

regular graph with variable nodes. This is obtained

by considering all the possible paths of length starting from

all the variable nodes in the graph. The memory required for

the storage of all the -cycles is of order

, where is

the number of -cycles in the graph. To the best of our knowl-

edge, there is no theoretical result on how scales with or

the degree distribution of the Tanner graph. Empirical results of

[16], however, suggest that is mainly a function of the de-

gree distribution and is rather independent of .

Regarding the complexity of expanding the input trapping

sets to larger ones, consider the expansion of an

trapping

set of a

graph. Depending on the size

of

the smallest trapping set(s) that contain , the complexity

and memory requirements for finding and storing the sets

would differ. For

, and

, the com-

plexity is

, and

, respectively.

The memory requirements for these cases are, respectively,

, and

. To see this, for example,

consider the case where

. To find , one needs to

check at most

variable nodes as possible candidates,

which corresponds to

complexity.3 The memory re-

quired to store all possible trapping sets of size

obtained

through such a search is, thus, upper bounded by

,

which is of order

.

Based on the aforementioned discussions, assuming that the

initial set is limited to cycles of length up to

, and that

we only consider trapping sets of size up to

in the expansion process, the complexity of Algorithm 1 will

be

and the memory

requirement will be

, where is the

maximum number of unsatisfied check nodes in Algorithm 1.

It is, however, important to note that the actual complexity and

memory requirements are much less than what these complexity

bounds may suggest. In particular, our simulation results show

that codes with block lengths up to about 10 000 with a wide va-

riety of degree distributions can be managed using the proposed

algorithm on a regular desktop computer.

nodes, and add it to to obtain a new trapping set with size

. This method of expansion leads to an exponentially

growing search space. Even by limiting the search space to the

trapping sets in , i.e., connected trapping sets for which every

variable node is connected to at least two satisfied check nodes,

there are still too many configurations for , especially when

. For practical LDPC codes with

, however, con-

sidering a nested sequence of trapping sets in , the size of the

next larger trapping set is almost always less than

.

The search for nonelementary trapping sets of size

in a graph with girth

can be performed similar to what

was described for the elementary trapping sets with a number of

small differences. For nonelementary trapping sets, since there

is no limitation on the degrees of the check nodes in

, only

the variable nodes of and their edges are removed from the

graph. Then the shortest paths between different check nodes of

or the shortest lollipop walks starting from different check

nodes of

are found. However, it should be mentioned that

not all such structures will necessarily satisfy the condition that

each variable node is connected to at least two satisfied check

nodes. After finding a candidate trapping set, one should, thus,

check for this condition. In summary, to find the nonelementary

trapping sets of size

, the only modifications needed

to be applied to Algorithm 1 are the following.

5: Construct a new graph by removing all the nodes of and their adjacent edges from .

7: for each node in

do

8: Examine the neighborhood of in one layer at a time

and to the maximum of layers in search for paths with

variable nodes between and the other nodes of

, and lollipop walks with

variable nodes starting

from .

19: if (

) and (

) and (

) then

IV. IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
For irregular LDPC codes which do not have variable nodes of degree 2, Algorithm 1 can be used without any modification to find the dominant trapping sets. As mentioned in Remark 4, based on the desired sizes of trapping sets, one may also remove the high-degree variable nodes and their edges from the graph to simplify the algorithm. In the case that the code has variable nodes of degree 2, some modifications are needed for the initial input set of the algorithm. In this section, we study the effect of degree-2 variable nodes on the structure of trapping sets in irregular LDPC codes, and present simple steps to find the corresponding trapping sets.4

F. Expansion of Nonelementary Trapping Sets

A. On the Degree-2 Variable Nodes

According to the general definition of trapping sets, any arbitrary set of variable nodes can be considered as a trapping set. Hence, to expand a connected trapping set of size , one just needs to select a variable node from the neighboring variable
3Here, we have ignored the extra complexity that would be involved in attaching the new variable node to the existing trapping set to form (and to store) .

It is known that degree-2 variable nodes play an important role in the performance of irregular LDPC codes. On the one hand, to have codes with asymptotic performance close to the
4In case that the graph contains degree-1 variable nodes as well, a similar approach to the one described in Section IV-B (for finding dominant trapping sets which include degree-2 variable nodes) can be used to find the dominant trapping sets containing degree-1 variable nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: EFFICIENT ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES

6949

capacity, the proportion of degree-2 variable nodes should be

as large as possible. This is usually a considerable fraction of

the total variable nodes of the code. On the other hand, having

a large proportion of degree-2 variable nodes results in a small

minimum distance and a high error floor [32]. Cycles containing

only degree-2 variable nodes are codewords. Hence, to have a

large minimum distance, it is desirable to avoid such cycles, es-

pecially the shorter ones. To avoid all cycles of any length con-

taining only degree-2 variable nodes, the number of these nodes

must be strictly less than the number of check nodes (i.e.,

). Based on this fact, a class of irregular LDPC codes

with

, called extended irregular repeat accumu-

late (eIRA) codes, was proposed in [43]. It was shown in [43]

that these codes exhibit relatively better error floor performance

compared to the codes constructed by the optimized degree dis-

tributions without applying this restriction on . Related to

this, it was proved in [28] that for the case where

,

the minimum distance grows at most logarithmically with the

code length. For the special case where

and all the

degree-2 variable nodes are part of a single cycle, the minimum

distance is a sublinear power function of the block length [32].

In the following, we study the effect of having a large fraction

of degree-2 variable nodes on the structure of trapping sets in

irregular LDPC codes.

Example 6: For all the degree distributions optimized for rate-1/2 LDPC codes on the binary-input AWGN (BIAWGN) channel [27], 43–55% of variable nodes are of degree 2. This implies that, on average, every check node in the corresponding codes is connected to about two variable nodes of degree 2.
The average number of degree-2 variable nodes connected to each check node becomes even larger for the optimized codes of higher rate. This is explained in the next example.

Example 7: For the optimized degree distribution of rate

over the BIAWGN channel with the maximum variable node

degree 10 [27], 31% of variable nodes are of degree 2. This

implies that, on average, every check node in a Tanner graph

with this degree distribution is connected to about six variable

nodes of degree 2.

Consequently, it is very likely to see chains of degree-2

variable nodes, referred to as 2-chains, in the Tanner graph of

LDPC codes with optimized degree distributions. The length of

a 2-chain is defined as the number of the edges in the subgraph

induced by the degree-2 variable nodes of the chain. That is,

the length of a 2-chain containing variable nodes of degree

2 is . A 2-chain of length is a

trapping set (with

the exception of the case where the chain is closed and forms

a cycle; in that case, we refer to the 2-chain as a 2-cycle. A

2-cycle of length is a

trapping set). Having only two

unsatisfied check nodes, 2-chains of length are among the

most dominant trapping sets of size . Fig. 6(a) shows a 2-chain

of length 10 (a

trapping set). Note that this trapping set

also contains two

, three

, four

, and five

trapping sets as its subsets. It is worth noting that although for

the cases where

and

, the graph may have

no or only one 2-cycle, it can have many 2-chains of different

lengths. For example, it is easy to see that for the case where

Fig. 6. Typical trapping sets constructed mostly by the degree-2 variable nodes.

and all the degree-2 variable nodes are contained in a

single cycle, there are 2-chains of length ,

.

Another aspect of having 2-chains in the Tanner graph of ir-

regular LDPC codes is that they might participate in short cycles

with other variable nodes of higher degrees. These cycles have

low approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) (ACE

is defined as

, where the summation is taken over all

the variable nodes of the cycle, and is the degree of the th

variable node in the cycle [33]). It has been shown that cycles

with low ACE deteriorate the error rate performance, and that

avoiding them in the construction of irregular LDPC codes gen-

erally improves the error rate [36], [42].

Example 8: Consider the case where

and all the

degree-2 variable nodes are contained in a single cycle. In this

case, there exist two 2-chains between any two check nodes

of the graph. This implies that every variable node of degree

along with the 2-chains connecting its check nodes

forms several trapping sets with at most

unsatisfied check

nodes.

Example 9: Fig. 6(b) shows a

trapping set composed of

one variable node of degree 3 and a chain of six variable nodes

of degree 2.

Example 10: The

trapping sets of the

LDPC code adopted in the IEEE 802.11 standard [11] are single

cycles of length 24, each consisting of a 2-chain of length 22 and

one degree-3 variable node.

Even in the cases where

(but not much smaller), it

is likely to see cycles mostly constructed by 2-chains.

Example 11: Fig. 6(c) shows a

trapping set composed

of two variable nodes of degree 3 and five variable nodes of

degree 2.

Due to the important role that 2-chains (and 2-cycles) play in

the formation of dominant trapping sets, we study the necessary

conditions to avoid these structures in the following theorem.

Theorem 1: Let be the number of check nodes and

be the number of degree-2 variable nodes in the graph cor-

responding to an irregular code . If for all

, has no

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

2-chains of length longer than or equal to and no 2-cycles of length less than or equal to , then

where

is the maximum check node degree in .

Proof: Let denote the induced subgraph of degree-2

variable nodes of the graph . This subgraph contains no

cycle. Otherwise, the length of such a cycle would be at least

, which would imply the existence of a 2-chain of length

in , and thus in . This contradicts the assumption of

the theorem. The subgraph

is, thus, composed of some

tree-like components. For each component, the number of

check nodes is always larger than the number of variable nodes

by one. Therefore, the total number of check nodes of the

graph is more than the number of degree-2 variable nodes

by at least the number of disjoint components in (some

check nodes of may not appear in ). To avoid 2-chains

of length or longer, the maximum number of variable nodes

in each component is

(Appendix D,

Lemma 8). The minimum number of components in is,

thus,

.

Theorem 1 can be used to determine the maximum number of degree-2 variable nodes in an irregular graph to avoid 2-chains (and 2-cycles) of a specific length.

Example 12: For an irregular code with 1000 check nodes of

degree

, to avoid

trapping sets corresponding to

2-chains of length 8, the number of variable nodes of degree 2

must be at most 910.

Theorem 1 can be also used to obtain some information about

the existence of trapping sets in a code.

satisfied check node. To obtain such trapping sets using the

expansion of smaller trapping sets, we consider an

trapping set which is expanded to a trapping set by the

connection of a variable node of degree 2 to an unsatisfied

check node of . Three cases are possible.

1) is not connected to any other check node of

. In

this case,

is an

trapping set. If is

elementary, so is .

2) is also connected to a satisfied check node of . In this

case,

is an

nonelementary trapping set.

3) is also connected to another unsatisfied check node of .

In this case,

is an

trapping set. If

is elementary (or is in the set ), so is .

Such an expansion of a trapping set can be performed multiple

times by adding one neighboring variable node of degree 2, each

time. This is summarized in Algorithm 2. In general, Algorithm

2 can be used with Algorithm 1 to expand the trapping sets found

by Algorithm 1. This is summarized in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 2: Finding trapping sets of size up to with the

number of unsatisfied check nodes up to constructed by

adding degree-2 variable nodes to the input trapping sets for an

irregular LDPC code with the Tanner graph

.

( and

are the lists of input and output trapping sets,

respectively.)

1: Inputs: , , and .

2:

.

3: repeat

4: Select an element of it as .

with size less than , and denote

Example 13: For the same scenario as that of Example 12

(i.e.,

), the eIRA construction [43] results in

. For these parameters, the smallest value

of which satisfies the inequality of Theorem 1 is

. This

implies that the eIRA code will have 2-chains of length 16 and

smaller, corresponding to

trapping sets for all values of

.

5: Form the set

which contains variable nodes of

degree 2 in that are connected to at least one unsatisfied

check node of , i.e., to

.

6: for each node in

do

7:

.

8: if (

)5 and (

) and (

) then

B. Finding Trapping Sets of Irregular LDPC Codes

9:

.

In this section, we present a simple process to find the dominant trapping sets involving degree-2 variable nodes.

10:

end if

The process can be used in combination with Algorithm 1 to 11: end for

find the dominant trapping sets of irregular graphs containing degree-2 variable nodes. It is important to note that according

12: until all the elements of

are selected.

to the definition of absorbing sets, any variable node of degree 13: Output: . 2 in these sets is connected to two satisfied check nodes. Also,

for the trapping sets found by Algorithm 1, each variable node Remark 7: Note that in Algorithm 2, the number of unsatis-

is connected to at least two satisfied check nodes. Therefore, fied check nodes of the resultant trapping sets never increases.

2-chains and other trapping sets containing variable node(s) of Hence, to find trapping sets of size with less than unsatisfied

degree 2 with one satisfied check node are neither absorbing check nodes, one should consider all the

trapping sets

sets nor found by Algorithm 1. In fact, it appears that being with

.6 It should be mentioned that since every

connected to two satisfied check nodes is too strong of a con- single variable node of degree can be regarded as a

dition for a variable node of degree 2 to be part of a dominant trapping set. For this reason, we consider also trapping sets whose variable nodes of degree 2 are connected to only one

5This condition ensures that each variable node of degree larger than 2 is connected to at least two satisfied check nodes. The condition has no bearing on degree-2 variable nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: EFFICIENT ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES

6951

recursively expand them to larger trapping sets. It should, however, be noted that for the irregular LDPC codes with a small fraction of degree-2 variable nodes, this approach may not find all the dominant trapping sets of the code.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

For the simulations, we assume binary phase-shift keying

Fig. 7. Typical expansions of degree-2 and degree-3 variable nodes by adding (BPSK) modulation over the AWGN channel with coherent de-

the neighboring degree-2 variable nodes.

tection. Notations and are used for the average energy

per information bit and the one-sided power spectral density of

the AWGN, respectively. trapping set, to find the trapping sets with less than unsatisfied check nodes, we consider also all the variable nodes of degree A. Regular Codes

as part of the initial set. For example, for the case of

, starting with a single variable node of degree

or

, two typical structures of the resultant trapping sets

are shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b), respectively. Note that starting

from a degree-2 variable node and performing the aforemen-

tioned steps results in finding a 2-chain.

We have applied the proposed algorithm successfully to a large number of regular LDPC codes. Here, we only present the results for four of them. The first three examples are random and structured LDPC codes whose dominant trapping sets have already been reported in the literature and thus provide us with a reference for comparison. The fourth example is a random

Algorithm 3: Finding trapping sets of size up to with the

number of unsatisfied check nodes up to for an irregular

LDPC code with the Tanner graph

.(

and

are the lists of input and output trapping sets,

respectively.)

LDPC code of rate 1/2 with regular variable node degree 4. To verify the trapping sets found by the proposed algorithm for this code, we estimate the error floor using importance sampling [5] based on the obtained trapping sets and demonstrate that the estimation is practically identical to the results of Monte Carlo simulations. The reported running times in the following exam-

1:Inputs: , , and .

ples are for a desktop computer with 2-GHz CPU and 1 GB of RAM.

2:Use as the input of Algorithm 1

Example 14: We consider an LDPC code constructed

3:

trapping sets found by Algorithm 1

4:

by the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [10] (PEGReg252x504 of [46]). This code is left-regular with the left degree 3 and girth 8. The same code was also investigated

5:Use 6:

as the input of Algorithm 2 trapping sets found by Algorithm 2

in [18] and the distribution of its fully absorbing sets was

determined. For Algorithm 1, the short cycles of lengths ,

, and

were used as the initial input set. The algorithm

7:Output: .

was limited to finding trapping sets of maximum size 13, and the threshold was selected such that only the trapping sets

Remark 8: For irregular codes, in addition to short cycles, with the two smallest values of for each size were considered.

cycles with low ACE are also considered as part of the initial (Using a larger has no effect on the accuracy of the results

input set of Algorithm 1. This is because these cycles may not be reported here.) Since all the variable nodes have degree 3, all

found using the expansion process of Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1 the trapping sets found by Algorithm 1 are absorbing sets.

finds the smallest trapping sets containing the input, which are Fully absorbing sets were found by examining the obtained

usually the combination of the input and a short cycle (or a struc- absorbing sets and testing them for the definition of a fully

ture described in Lemmas 2–4). Since variable nodes of large absorbing set. Table I shows the classes of the absorbing sets

degree are more likely to be part of such structures, the outputs and the fully absorbing sets found by the proposed algorithm

of Algorithm 1 are usually the combinations of the input and and their multiplicities. In the table, we have also reported

variable node(s) of large degree. This is while cycles with low the results obtained by the exhaustive search algorithm of

ACE are generally constructed by low degree variable nodes. [18], for comparison. (Note that the hyphen notation “-” in

Cycles with low ACE can be easily found by monitoring the the table means that no data were reported.) As can be seen

ACE value during the execution of a cycle finding algorithm. from Table I, for many classes of trapping sets, the proposed

Remark 9: As an alternative approach to using Algorithm 3, one can only use Algorithm 2 with the variable nodes of low degree and cycles with low ACE as the initial input set, and then

algorithm found exactly the same number of fully absorbing

sets as the exhaustive search algorithm in [18] did. For the

other classes, the difference between the two sets of results is

rather small. Moreover, the proposed algorithm found

,

6Although this condition may not cover all the trapping sets discussed in Part of Section IV-B, our simulations show that for the tested codes, almost all the trapping sets are in fact found by Algorithm 2. The trapping sets that are missed by Algorithm 2 are the ones that can only be obtained by starting from trapping sets with larger number of unsatisfied check nodes.

,

, and

fully absorbing sets which are out

of the reach of the exhaustive search algorithm. It is worth

mentioning that the exhaustive search algorithm in [18], using

a desktop computer with an Intel Core 2 2.4-GHz CPU and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

TABLE I DOMINANT ABSORBING SETS (ABS) AND FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF THE PEGREG252X504 CODE OBTAINED BY THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM AND THE
EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM IN [18]

TABLE II DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF THE TANNER
THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM

CODE OBTAINED BY

TABLE III

DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF THE MARGULIS

CODE OBTAINED

BY THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM AND THE ALGORITHM IN [2]

2-GB memory [19], took about 7 h to find only the first three rows of Table I [18] (needless to say, the larger the size of the absorbing sets, the longer the running time of the algorithm). This is while Algorithm 1 took only 10 min to find all the absorbing sets listed in Table I.

Example 15: In this example, we consider the Tanner

code [31]. This code was also investigated in [38].

The exhaustive search algorithm in [38] showed that this code

has no trapping set of length less than 8 with two unsatisfied

check nodes and has no trapping set of length up to 11 with one

unsatisfied check node. It was also shown in [38] that the code

has 465

trapping sets.

The girth for the Tanner graph of this code is

. The short

cycles of lengths , , and were used as the initial inputs

to Algorithm 1. The algorithm was limited to only finding trap-

ping sets of maximum size 12 and the threshold was selected

such that only the trapping sets with the two smallest values of

for each size were considered. Table II shows the classes of the

trapping sets found by the proposed algorithm and their multi-

plicities. As can be seen in the table, the algorithm found all the

465

trapping sets among others. All the trapping sets in

Table II were found in less than 2 min.

To further verify that the obtained trapping sets do in fact in-

clude the dominant ones, we performed Monte Carlo simula-

tions on the code with a 4-bit quantized min-sum decoder over

the AWGN channel at the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 6.5 dB

(which is in the error floor region of this code). Among the 300

error patterns, about 90% were

trapping sets, about 8%

were

trapping sets, and only 2 did not belong to the sets

nant trapping sets of this code are 1320

and 1320

trapping sets [26]. The Tanner graph of this code has girth

.

The set of short cycles of lengths ,

, and

was used

as the input set of the proposed algorithm. The algorithm was

limited to use only the trapping sets with the two smallest values

of for each size. Since the degree of all the variable nodes of

this code is 3, all the trapping sets found by Algorithm 1 are also

absorbing sets. The first column in Table III shows the classes

of the dominant absorbing sets found by Algorithm 1. For com-

parison, the classes of the dominant trapping sets obtained by

the algorithm in [2] are listed in the last column of Table III. It

should be noted that in [2] there is no condition on the number

of satisfied check nodes connected to each variable node. Thus

to have a fair comparison, we also consider the trapping sets

constructed by the combination of trapping sets found by Algo-

rithm 1 and one of their neighboring variable nodes. The second

column of Table III shows the number of such trapping sets.7 As

can be seen, for all the trapping set classes, the proposed algo-

rithm performs at least as well as the algorithm in [2]. More-

over, the required time for the algorithm in [2] was 7 days on

a 2.8-GHz PC [2], while the proposed algorithm took about 5

reported in Table II.

7Our simulations indicate that the effect of extra trapping sets found by re-

Example 16: As the third example, we consider the Margulis

moving the constraint on the number of satisfied check nodes connected to each variable node of the trapping set on the error floor performance of the code is

code [22], [46]. It is known that the most domi- negligible.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: EFFICIENT ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES

6953

Fig. 8. Error floor estimation and Monte Carlo simulation for the

regular LDPC code (

).

TABLE IV

DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF THE

REGULAR LDPC CODE

(

) OBTAINED BY THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM

can be seen in Fig. 8, the estimation closely matches the Monte

Carlo simulation, verifying the dominance of the trapping sets

found by Algorithm 1. Monte Carlo simulations also revealed

that the most harmful trapping sets of this code belong to the

trapping set class. In fact, in almost all the decoding fail-

ures, the decoder converged to a

trapping set. As can be

seen in Table IV, all the trapping sets have at least four unsatis-

fied check nodes. This makes the exhaustive search methods in

[18], [37], and [38] ineffective for finding the dominant trapping

sets of this code. This is while all the trapping sets in Table IV

were found in less than 5 min by the proposed algorithm.

B. Irregular Codes

In this section, we present the results of applying the proposed

h to finish. As another comparison for the running time of the proposed algorithm, it took the algorithm 55 min to find all the absorbing sets of size less than 15, while the same task took 8.2 h for the impulse method in [5] on a comparable computer (2.2-GHz CPU with 1-GB RAM).

algorithm to three irregular LDPC codes. To find the dominant trapping sets of the irregular codes, we used two approaches. In the first approach, we used Algorithms 1 and 2 in the framework described in Algorithm 3. In this approach, as the first step, we used the short cycles of the codes, as well as the low ACE cycles as the initial input set, and applied Algorithm 1. We then used

Example 17: For this example, we consider a

the trapping sets found by Algorithm 1 along with the variable

random code with variable node degree 4 and check node de- nodes of low degree, and applied Algorithm 2 to expand them.

gree 8 constructed by the program in [46].8 This code has one As the second approach, we only used the variable nodes of low

cycle of length 4 ( ). In addition to that, the short cycles of degree and cycles with low ACE as the initial input set, and then

length 6 to 10 were used as the initial input set for Algorithm used Algorithm 2 to recursively expand them to larger trapping

1. The algorithm was constrained to find trapping sets of size sets. Interestingly, for all three codes, the results of the second

up to 12 and to use only the trapping sets with the two smallest approach were very close to those of the first one.

values of for each size. Table IV shows the classes of the dominant trapping sets found by Algorithm 1 and their multiplicities. It is worth mentioning that none of the trapping sets listed in Table IV contains any of the variable nodes participating in . The trapping sets reported in Table IV were used to estimate the error floor of the code using the importance sampling technique described in [5]. Fig. 8 shows the Monte Carlo simulation results for the FER and the corresponding error floor estimation based on importance sampling. The results are for a 3-bit min-sum decoder with a maximum number of 50 iterations. As

Example 18: For this example, we consider the irreg-

ular LDPC code constructed by the PEG algorithm (PE-

GirReg252x504 code [46]). This code was also investigated

in [18] for its fully absorbing sets. For Algorithm 1, the short

cycles of lengths ,

, and the cycles with length less than

20 and ACE less than 4 were used as the initial input set. The

algorithm was constrained to find only trapping sets of size less

than 12 and the threshold was selected such that only the

trapping sets with the four smallest values of for each size

were considered. The resultant trapping sets and variable nodes

8Using code6.c with seed=380.

of degrees 2 and 3 were then expanded by adding neighboring

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

Fig. 9. Error floor estimation and Monte Carlo simulation for the

irregular LDPC code.

TABLE V DOMINANT FULLY ABSORBING SETS OF THE PEGIRREG252X504 CODE OBTAINED BY THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM AND THE ALGORITHM IN [18]

TABLE VI

DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF THE

CODE OBTAINED BY THE

PROPOSED ALGORITHM

degree-2 variable nodes, and finally were examined to find the

fully absorbing sets. Table V shows the classes of the fully

absorbing sets found by Algorithm 3 and the exhaustive search

algorithm in [18]. It should be noted that, similar to [18], we

relaxed the condition that degree-2 variable nodes of (fully)

absorbing sets must be connected to two satisfied check nodes.

As can be seen from Table V, the proposed algorithm found

almost all the fully absorbing sets of this code.9 Moreover, the

proposed algorithm found a number of

trapping sets

for

, which were not reported in [18]. For the second

9The multiplicity for the

and

trapping sets are reported as 274

and 468 in [18], respectively. Moreover, no

or

trapping set is re-

ported in [18]. The values reported for these four trapping sets in the last column

of Table V are based on [19].

approach, the cycles of length up to 20 with ACE lower than 4 and the variable nodes of degrees 2 and 3 were used as the initial inputs, and the algorithm found almost the same trapping sets as in the first approach. For the running time, the first and the second approaches took 15 min and 5 min, respectively.
Example 19: For this example, we used the structured irregular code with rate , adopted in the IEEE 802.11 standard [11]. We used the same parameters as in the previous example for the two approaches. Table VI shows the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: EFFICIENT ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES

6955

Fig. 10. Error floor estimation and Monte Carlo simulation for the

irregular LDPC code.

number of dominant trapping sets of different sizes found by

the algorithm in [2] and the proposed approaches. For this code,

both of our approaches found exactly the same set of trapping

sets. In fact, all the trapping sets listed in Table VI have one

of the following three structures: a 2-chain, a single cycle with

low ACE, and the combination of a 2-chain and a single cycle

of low ACE. For example, all the trapping sets of size less than

7 listed in Table VI are 2-chains, and all the

trapping

sets are single cycles of eleven degree-2 variable nodes and

one degree-3 variable node. As can be seen in Table VI, for all

classes of trapping sets, the proposed algorithms found at least

as many trapping sets as the algorithm in [2] did. The first and

the second approaches took 45 and 5 min, respectively, to find

all the trapping sets in Table VI. This is while the algorithm in

[2] took 5 days (on a 2.8-GHz CPU) to find the results reported

in Table VI.

Based on the importance sampling technique in [5], the trap-

ping sets in Table VI with size ,

, were used

to estimate the error floor of this code for a 3-bit quantized

min-sum decoder over the AWGN channel. Fig. 9 shows the

error floor estimation and the Monte Carlo simulation results

for this code. As can be seen in Fig. 9, the importance sampling

estimation closely matches the Monte Carlo simulation, further

verifying the dominance of the trapping sets found by the pro-

posed algorithm.

initial input set of Algorithm 2. It takes 1 min for the algorithm to find the trapping sets of size up to 10. Based on the obtained trapping sets and using importance sampling, we estimate the error floor of the code. Fig. 10 shows the estimation and Monte Carlo simulations for this code. As can be seen in this figure, the estimation closely matches the Monte Carlo simulation results, verifying that the dominant trapping sets of the code have been found by the algorithm.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an efficient algorithm for finding the dominant trapping sets of an LDPC code. The algorithm starts from an initial set of trapping sets and recursively and greedily expands them to trapping sets of larger size. The initial set for regular codes is a set of short cycles, and for irregular codes, it also includes variable nodes of small degree and cycles with low ACE values. To devise the expansions, the structure of dominant trapping sets is carefully studied for both regular and irregular codes. The efficiency and accuracy of the proposed algorithm was demonstrated through a number of examples. It was observed that the proposed algorithm is faster by up to about two orders of magnitude compared to similar search algorithms.
APPENDIX A

Example 20: As the last example, we use the following de-

Lemma 7: For a left-regular graph with left degree

gree distribution optimized for the min-sum algorithm in [4] and and girth

,10 consider an

trapping set with

.

construct a

LDPC code using the PEG algorithm:

and

. The girth of the

resultant graph is 6, and we use the short cycles of lengths 6

and 8, and cycles of length up to 20 with ACE less than 4 as the

10For the case of

, it is easy to see that any

elementary trapping

set has

or

. For

, the smallest value of is , which corre-

sponds to the trapping set being a shortest cycle. For an elementary trapping set

with

, the smallest value of is 1, which corresponds to a single variable

node. For a nonelementary

trapping set, however, if

, the smallest

value of is . If

, the minimum value of for such a trapping set is 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6956

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

If such a trapping set is elementary, let the notation denote

its size, and consider the case where

. Otherwise,

for nonelementary trapping sets with

, let the notations

and denote the size of the trapping set if it has at least

one unsatisfied check node of degree

and one satisfied

check node of degree

in

, respectively. For the two

latter cases, suppose that

and

,

respectively. Then depending on the value of , we have the

following two sets of inequalities.

1) For

, where is an integer larger than 1, we have

2) For

, where is a positive integer, we have

one needs to make

as small as possible in each

check node layer of the tree. In particular, this should be done

at the first (upper) layer(s) of the tree if possible, since these

layers contribute the most in the total number of variable nodes

in the tree. In addition, to obtain a lower bound on the size of the

trapping sets, we assume that even for the nonelementary case,

except for one check node, the degrees of all the other check

nodes in

are either 1 or 2. Moreover, we assume that all

the check nodes of degree 1 are in the first (upper) layer(s) of

check nodes after the root layer.

For the case of an elementary trapping set, according to the

assumption of

, there is at least one variable node that is

not connected to any unsatisfied check nodes. Considering such

a variable node as the root node, all the check nodes in the first

layer are satisfied check nodes. That is,

(root node),

,

,

and

,

, for

.11

Therefore, the total number of variable nodes in the constructed

tree is

.

Distinction should be made between the cases of

and

. While in the former, the last layer of the tree consists

of variable nodes, in the latter, it consists of check nodes. In the

case where the last layer consists of check nodes, for each set

of check nodes in the last layer of the tree, there must be at

least one other variable node in . The sketches of the proofs

for the nonelementary cases are similar to that of the elementary

case, with the difference that the check node of degree or

is used as the root node.

APPENDIX B

1) Proof of Lemma 5: Consider the

neighbors of

in

. At least

of them are in

and are thus

connected to other variable nodes in . None of such variable

nodes can share more than one check node from

with ,

because of the condition

. This implies that there are at

least

variable nodes in

.

Proof: Here, we just present the sketch of the proof. For

this, we first need the following lemma, whose proof is given in

APPENDIX C

Appendix C.

1) Proof of Lemma 6(i): Since

does not contain any

Lemma 6(i): In a left-regular graph with left degree

cycle, it forms a tree (note that

is connected). Suppose

, if the induced subgraph

of an

trapping set does that

is grown from a variable node of as the root, one

not contain any cycle, then

. The inequality is layer at a time, until along each path, the growth is terminated

satisfied with equality for elementary trapping sets.

by reaching a check node as a leaf. These nodes are the unsatis-

Based on Lemma 6(i), it is clear that a trapping set with

fied check nodes of degree one. In the tree, each variable node,

has at least one cycle. Therefore, considering any variable except the root, has a parent which is a check node of degree at

(or check) node of as the root, and growing

from that least 2. In the case that is elementary, the degree of the parent

node, one can construct a tree of at least layers, where the check nodes is 2, and hence each check node is the parent to

layers contain either variable or check nodes alternately, with one variable node. There are thus exactly

check nodes of

no repetition of nodes. The number of variable nodes in this tree degree 2 in

. Since

is a tree, the number of its nodes

can be used as a lower bound on the number of variable nodes equals the number of its edges plus one. The total number of

in . In this tree, the number of check nodes in layer

of nodes in the graph is

and the total number

the tree, , is

, where

is the number of edges is

, where is the number of unsatisfied check

of variable nodes in layer . Similarly,

where

is the degree (within

) of the

, check node

11Here, based on the statement of the lemma, we have assumed that all the unsatisfied check nodes can fit in the third layer of the tree. In the case that

in layer , and the summation is over all the check nodes in layer . To minimize the number of variable nodes in the tree,

, some of the unsatisfied check nodes have to be located in the next layer(s), and the aforementioned equations and the claims of the lemma will have to be accordingly revised.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: EFFICIENT ALGORITHM FOR FINDING DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS OF LDPC CODES

6957

nodes of degree 1. For an elementary trapping set, we, thus, have

, which implies that

.

In the case that is not elementary, some variable nodes may

share the same parent. The number of parent check nodes is,

thus, less than

, and therefore

.

APPENDIX D

Lemma 8: Let

be a left-regular bipartite

graph with left degree 2. Consider a set

, for which the

induced subgraph is a tree and has the longest path of length

. Then,

, where is the

number of nodes in and

is the maximum degree of the

nodes in .

Proof: The upper bound is derived by counting the number

of variable nodes in a tree where the number of check nodes is

maximized with the constraint that the longest path has

edges. This implies that there is a path of length

between

any two leaf check nodes of

. In addition, to maximize

, the degree of all the check nodes in

is assumed to be

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the Associate Editor and the anonymous reviewers whose comments have improved the presentation of this paper.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[2] S. Abu-Surra, D. DeClercq, D. Divsalar, and W. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Jan.–Feb. 31–5, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[3] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error floor avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Los Angeles, CA, Sep. 2005, vol. 4, pp. 2386–2390.
[4] S. Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., , 2000.
[5] C. Cole, S. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. Giallorenzi, A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes CoRR [Online]. Available: arxiv.org/abs/cs/0605051.
[6] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Evaluation of the low frame error rate performance of LDPC codes using importance sampling,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2–6, 2007, pp. 202–207.
[7] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wainwright, “Predicting error floors of LDPC codes: Deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, Aug. 2009.
[8] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[9] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “LDPC decoder strategies for achieving low error floors,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Jan. 2008, pp. 277–286.
[10] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[11] . Wireless LAN Medium Access Control and Physical Layer Specifications: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE-802.11n, Mar. 2008, P802.11n/D3.07.
[12] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.

[13] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55,
no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009. [14] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial anal-
ysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Wireless Networks, Commun. Mobile Comput., HI, Jun. 13–16, 2005, pp. 630–635. [15] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Appl., Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82. [16] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, A message-passing algorithm for counting short cycles in a graph CoRR [Online]. Available: arxiv.org/ abs/1004.3966 [17] K. M. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of a Tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2278–2280, Jun. 2007. [18] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Exhaustive search for small fully absorbing sets and the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Austin, TX, Jun. 2010, pp. 739–743. [19] G. B. Kyung, private communication. [20] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1640–1650, Apr. 2010. [21] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theoretical Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003. [22] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982. [23] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007. [24] K. Murali Krishnan and L. Sunil Chandran, “Hardness of approximation results for the problem of finding the stopping distance in Tanner graphs,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Foundations Softw. Technol. Theoretical Comput. Sci., Kolkata, India, Dec. 13–15, 2006, pp. 69–80. [25] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasic, “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012. [26] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435. [27] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001. [28] A. Otmani, J.-P. Tillich, and I. Andriyanova, “On the minimum distance of generalized LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 751–755. [29] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4167–4178, Sep. 2009. [30] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (Regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jun. 2010. [31] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370. [32] J.-P. Tillich and G. Zemor, “On the minimum distance of structured LDPC codes with two variable nodes of degree 2 per parity-check equation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 9–14, 2006, pp. 1549–1553. [33] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1248, Aug. 2004. [34] B. Vasic, S. Chilappagari, D. Nguyen, and S. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2009, pp. 1–7.
[35] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes CoRR [Online]. Available: arxiv.org/abs/cs/0512078
[36] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, “Generalized ACE constrained progressive edge growth LDPC code design,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 32–34, Jan. 2008.
[37] C.-C. Wang, “On the exhaustion and elimination of trapping sets: Algorithms & the suppressing effect,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 2271–2275.
[38] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1998, May 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6958

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

[39] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Estimation of bit and frame error rates of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2234–2239, Dec. 2007.
[40] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of finite-length low-density parity-check codes decoded by soft-decision iterative algorithms,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 6–11, 2008, pp. 439–443.
[41] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels using cycle enumeration,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1550–1555, Jun. 2009.
[42] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–718, Dec. 2004.
[43] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently-encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[44] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[45] V. Zyablov and M. Pinsker, “Estimates of the error-correction complexity of Gallager’s low-density codes,” Problems Inf. Transm., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28, Jan. 1976.
[46] [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/ codes/.
Mehdi Karimi (S’10) received the B.A.Sc. degree and M.A.Sc degrees both in electrical engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 2003 and 2005, respectively. From 2005 to 2008, he was with the Information and Communication Technology Institute, Isfahan University of Technology. Since 2008, he has been pursuing his Ph.D. studies at Carleton University, Canada. His research interests include graphical modeling, coding and information theory, statistical signal processing and wireless communications.

Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. During 1994–1997, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, for his Ph.D. degree. He held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students during this period. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, where he worked as a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University in 1998, where at present he is a Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communications algorithms, and compressive sensing and sampling. He has published more than 150 papers in refereed journals and conferences.
Dr. Banihashemi served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009. He is the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University. He has been involved in many international conferences as chair, member of technical program committee, and member of organizing committee. These include co-chair for the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom’07, TPC co-chair of the Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, member of the organizing committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and co-chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. Dr. Banihashemi is a recipient of Carleton University Research Achievement Award in 2006 and 2012, and Faculty Graduate Mentoring Award in 2011. He is also awarded one of the NSERC’s one hundred 2008 Discovery Accelerator Supplements (DAS).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

