Improved Decoder Design for LDPC Codes based on selective node processing

Sachin Singh Khati
Independent, India sachinsinghkhati@yahoo.com

Pooja Bisht
Technologia - etisalat, India bisht.pooja1306@gmail.com

Subhash Chandra Pujari
Samsung India, India subhash.pujari@gmail.com

Abstract:-This paper proposes a low complexity decoder design for low density parity check (ldpc) codes. The design primarily comprises a novel decoding algorithm and semi parallel high throughput architecture. Based on the observation that nodes with high log likelihood ratio provide almost same information in every iteration and can be deemed as static, we propose an algorithm in which the parity check matrix H is updated to a reduced form every time a static node is encountered resulting in lesser number of computations in subsequent iterations. Also the design greatly benefits from the area efficient semi-parallel architecture and the various improvisations introduced at different levels of abstraction in the decoder design. The decoder design is implemented for a ldpc code compliant with WLAN 802.11n standard using sum product algorithm. The simulation results showed a significantly higher throughput with an easily controllable increase in bit error rate.
Keywords: Low Density Parity Check, Static nodes, Variable node update, Check Node update, WLAN
1. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC)codes have received widespread attention in recent times due to their ability to perform very close to Shannon limit. LDPC codes, because of their excellent code correcting capabilities have been widely adopted in many new generation standards like Digital Video Broadcasting(DVB_S2), Broadband Wireless Access(WiMax), Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN), 10 Gigabit Ethernet(10GBASET), Deep space communication etc. LDPC codes were invented by Gallager in 1960s[1] but were not worked upon for almost three decades until Mackay[2][3] rediscovered them in mid 1990s . The codes were largely forgotten because of the implementation challenges. The

structure of low density parity check codes is inherently parallel which enables the decoder to have a very high throughput design but at the cost of large chip area. Conventional methods of Low Density Parity Check decoding in general involves very large number of computations, large chip area, huge power consumption and decoding delays. It is imperative to reduce the number of computations involved in the the decoding process in order to make the decoding faster and and implement the decoder with low power consumption and high throughput.
This paper proposes a high throughput decoder design based on improved sum product algorithm. The decoding algorithm is based on the observation that nodes with high log likelihood ratio provide almost same information in every iteration which need not to be calculated in every iteration. The messages from the nodes having high log likelihood ratio can be cached and accessed directly when required, eliminating the need for computations at these nodes. As we proceed to higher iterations the number of nodes with high log likelihood ratio increases. The number of computations to be performed reduces as the number iteration increases hence the overall complexity of the decoder is reduced. A semi parallel decoder design is also proposed for regular low density parity check codes[4]. The design enables the decoder to perform multi row and column processing simultaneously. A low complexity design is also proposed for syndrome checking which reduces the large number of matrix multiplication computation at syndrome check operation.
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes LDPC codes and message passing algorithm. Section 3 describes the proposed decoding algorithm. Section 4 describes architecture for decoder. Section 5 describes Implementation results and observations. Section 6 is the conclusion section.

978-1-4673-4805-8/12/$31.00 c 2012 IEEE

413

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:39:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2. LDPC CODES AND MESSAGE PASSING ALGORITHM
A low-density parity check code is a linear block code defined by a sparse M X N binary matrix called the parity check matrix H[7][8] , where the number of columns N in matrix H represents the number of bits in the code word and the number of rows M represents the number of parity bits in the code word. Column weight Wc is defined as the number of ones in a column of matrix H and row weight Wr is defined as number of ones in a row of matrix H. LDPC codes can also be described by a bipartite factor graph[5][6] or tanner graph[5][6]. A parity check matrix and corresponding bipartite or tanner graph is shown in figure 1 .

НіНІНіНІНіНІНіНІ

вҖ« ЬӘвҖ¬аөҢ бүҺНІНі

НІ Ні

НІ Ні

Ні НІ

НІ НІ

Ні Ні

НІ Ні

НІНібүҸ

НІНіНІНіНіНІНІНі

Figure1a: Parity check Matrix

Figure1b: Bipartite graph or tanner graph of the Matrix shown in figure1a
In a bipartite factor graph there are two sets of nodes, check nodes[7][5] and variable nodes[7][5]. Each row in the parity check matrix corresponds to check node C in the bipartite graph and each column corresponds to a variable node V in the graph. The check nodes are represented with a square block in the figure and the variable node is represented with a circle in the figure. If there is a position in H matrix where Hij=1 [6], it represents that there is a connection between check node Ci and variable node Vj as shown in the figure.

LDPC codes are usually decoded by using an iterative message passing algorithm[9] which consists of following two operations: row processing or check node update[5][9] in which all check nodes receive message from connected variable nodes and calculate the message to be passed back to variable nodes. The column processing or variable node update[5][9] involves the calculation of message to be passed from variable to check node based on the message received from check nodes. The two common message passing algorithms used for decoding LDPC codes are sum-product algorithm[10][5][11] and min-sum algorithm[10][5][12]. In this paper we will discuss the sum product algorithm and our modified sum product algorithm.

2.1 sum product algorithm

Assuming that a code word X of length N
(x1,x2,вҖҰвҖҰ..xN) is passed through an Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel using Binary Phase
Shift Keying (BPSK) modulation and we receive a
sequence Y(y1,y2,вҖҰвҖҰвҖҰyN).V(i)/j is defined as the set of variable nodes connected to check node Ci except for the variable node Vj. C(i)/j is defined as the set of check nodes connected to variable node Vi except for the check node Cj . LLRi is defined as the log likelihood ratio[13] of the received symbol yiand calculated as

LLRiаөҢ ВҺВҗ бүҖаӯ”аӯ”бҲәбҲәаӯ¶аӯ¶аұ…аұ…аӯҖаӯҖа¬ҙа¬өИҒИҒаӯ·аӯ·аұҹаұҹбҲ»бҲ»бүҒ

(1)

rij [10]is defined as the message pased from check node Ci to variable node Vj. qij [10] is defined as the message passed from variable node Vi to check nodes Cj .Sum product algorithm can be described as follows: The
received LLR values are assigned to qij during initialization. During each iteration rij and qij are computed and there values are passed on. In row processing or
check node update rij messages are calculated using the equation

В”аӯ§аӯЁ аөҢ а·‘ В•ВӢВүВҗбҲәвҖ«ЭҚвҖ¬аҜңаҜқбҮұбҲ» аөҲ Ф„ бүҢ а·Қ Я¶аө«ИҒвҖ«ЭҚвҖ¬аҜңаҜқбҮұИҒаөҜбүҚ

аҜқбҮұвҖ«ЧҗвҖ¬аҜҸбҲәаҜңбҲ»ИҖаҜқ

аҜқМҙвҖ«ЧҗвҖ¬аҜҸбҲәаҜңбҲ»МіаҜқ

(2)
Where Я¶бҲәВҡбҲ» аөҢ аөҶВҺВ‘Вү бүҖВ–ВғВҗВҠ аӯ¶бүҒ
а¬¶
In column processing or variable node update qij messages are calculated using the LLR values from the
received sequence Y and the rij values as shown in the equation

В“аӯ§аӯЁ аөҢ  аӯЁ аө…  ПғаҜңвҖ«ЧҗвҖ¬аІҙбҲәаі•бҲ»ИҖаҜң В”аӯ§бҮұаӯЁ

(3)

414

2012 World Congress on Information and Communication Technologies

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:39:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

When column processing is finished then every bit of column is added with the received LLR values to form an updated vector X which is then used from syndrome checking and termination. From the updated vector an estimated code vector V = (v1,v2,вҖҰ.vN) is calculated using hard decision ie

Ьёаӯ§ аөҢ аөңНіНІЗЎЗЎ

ВӢВҲаҜң аө‘ НІ ВӢВҲЬәаӯ§ аөҗ НІ

If HVT = 0 then it is believed that the V is the actual code word and further iterations are stopped else the iterations are performed till the above condition is satisfied or the number of iteration reaches a predefined maximum value.

3. PROPOSED MODIFIED SUM PRODUCT DECODING ALGORITHM
When a code word undergoes a large number of iterations the message passed by a node with very high log likelihood ratio remains almost constant hence that node can be deemed as static in nature. These kind of static nodes only provide redundant information in every iteration which doesnвҖҷt required to be calculated in every iteration and can easily be cached so that message calculation is done only for relevant nodes and rest of the information is read from cache. As the number of nodes having high log likelihood value increases after every iteration the number of calculations to be performed in every iteration reduces significantly hence the overall computational complexity of the system reduces with each iteration. This algorithm can be implemented as follows:
We create a buffer of the size of the sparse H matrix . This buffer gets updated after every iteration whenever a static node is encountered. A static node is detected when the value of message calculated at a node surpasses a predefined threshold and is clipped to the threshold value. These node values after reaching the threshold are not calculated in further iterations, and the node information is not included in the updated buffer. The buffer is used for check node and variable node calculation in every iteration while the original H matrix remains intact for code estimation and syndrome check. The buffer matrix which is updated after every iteration contains information of the nodes that needs to be calculated in further iterations and does not carry information regarding the static nodes. This does not affect the calcualtions of variable to check node message qij or check node to variable node message rij as the row

weight and column weight remain same as in the original H matrix which helps in calculating the node values during row and column processing in the sum product algorithm or min sum algorithm. The decoding algorithm is implemented for a Wireless LAN standard matrix .

CHANNEL LLR
INITIALIZATION

q ij
CHECK NODE UPDATE

rij
LLR

BUFFER UPDATE

VARIABLE NODE UPDATE

CODE ESTIMATION

SYNDROME CHECK
HVвҖҷ=0
CODE WORD

HVвҖҷ!=0

Figure2 : Block diagram for the decoding algorithm

4. DESIGN OF DECODER
In this section we describe the design architecture of the ldpc decoder unit, which is designed in such a way so as to minimize the chip area and help in increasing the throughput of the decoder. The decoder module basically performs three operation row processing, column processing and syndrome check. We have proposed a semi parallel processing architecture for the decoder which increases the throughput many folds in comparison to the serial processing design. The design involves multiple processing units for row and column operation.

2012 World Congress on Information and Communication Technologies

415

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:39:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The rows of matrix are grouped in blocks of P1 rows each and a row processing unit is assigned to it. Similarly columns are grouped into blocks of P2 columns each as shown in figure3 .

Figure3: Matrix is divided in blocks of P1 rows(Columns in original form) for check node update, Columns in blocks of P2 for variable node update.
As the number of computations involved in row processing or check node update is generally higher than the number of computations involved in column processing or variable node update the size of block for columns is higher than the block size for rows. The grouping of rows and columns into blocks containing lesser number of rows and column allows the decoder to work faster as it can do multiple row and column processing simultaneously using multiple processing units with one processing unit assigned to each block. We have implemented the design for LDPC with code word length 1296 and different code rates as defined in Wireless LAN standards(IEEE 802.11n)[13]. Matrix for code rate 2/3 is shown in figure5. The matrix is for a code word of length n= 1296 with 432 parity bits. The representation is such that every element of the shown matrix represents a square matrix of size 54 and the value of element represents the the circular right shift that square identity matrix of size 54 has undergone [14]. The following matrix is a regular LDPC code H matrix with row weight Wr = 8 and column weight Wc=12 which means that every row of the parity check matrix contains only 8 ones and every column contains only 12 ones.

figure4: (1296,432) Matrix for WLAN standards with sub block size Z= 54 and code rate R = 2/3
Matrix storage and Memory: The matrix is stored in compressed row storage[15] format and compressed column storage[15] format. In compressed row storage only information regarding the non-zero elements in the matrix is stored with indices corresponding to the actual row-column position in the original matrix. The shift values are stored in contiguous array locations with another array storing the the corresponding indices so that the actual row and column position of an element can be decoded when needed. A large memory unit is used to store the messages from check node and variable node. The size of memory depends on the number of ones in the parity check matrix or the number of connections the bipartite graph. The values are stored using 11 bit fixed point representation. The memory units consists of block RAMs . One can have same memory unit for check node messages and variable node messages which gets overwritten after every variable or check node update or one can have separate memory units for check node and variable node message depending on area throughput trade-off. Having one memory for both the messages saves a lot of chip area but is considerably slower than the separate memory design. We have implemented separate memory design. Unlike one memory model where one has to wait for the column processing to finish so that row processing can be started, in separate memory model we can start row processing operations after some delay. Syndrome check operation being dependent only on variable node processing, can be done simultaneously with check node processing. The nonlinear function Ф„бҲәВҡбҲ» is implemented using a piece wise linear approximation of the function. Linear interpolation is also used in calculation of the function values for non-sampled points . This can be easily done by making a look up table containing the sampled values of function Ф„(x) at some specific points and a linear interpolation function calculating the non-sampled values.

416

2012 World Congress on Information and Communication Technologies

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:39:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Row processing or check node update: In row processing only the rows are assumed to be divided in form of blocks while the columns are considered to be in their original format. So for a matrix of size M X N we have M/P1 row processing units performing check node update simultaneously. In every iteration each row processing units perform rij computations for one block i.e just for P1 X Z rows. We used 4 row processing unit with each processing unit performing computations on 108 rows in each iteration.
Column processing or variable node update: In column processing only the columns are assumed to be in form of blocks while the rows are considered to be in their original format. So for a matrix of size M X N we have N/P2 column processing units performing variable node update simultaneously. We used 8 column processing units with each unit performing qij computations on 162 columns.
Design of syndrome check block: An integral part of the decoder is syndrome check operation[5], which basically involves matrix multiplication and must be done after every variable node update to know whether the received code has been decoded or not and this operation is repeated in every iteration and takes significant amount of time .Our proposed method for syndrome check results in lesser number of operation and hence make the decoding faster resulting in high throughput. The matrix multiplication involved in the decoder design for syndrome checking is modulo two binary multiplication i.e. corresponding bits of row and column are multiplied and then modulo two addition operation is performed on them .In our proposed algorithm ,to check whether HVT= 0 ,we just find if for every вҖҳ1вҖҷ in a row of sparse H matrix if there is a вҖҳ1вҖҷ at that position in the corresponding column of the estimated VT[5] matrix ,for every match we increment the counter by one and at the end of row depending on whether the count is even or odd we calculate the modulo two addition and hence the element at particular position is calculated .If any element of the HVT comes out to be вҖҳ1вҖҷ (which would mean HVT!=0) the syndrome check fails and the control unit starts the next iteration. So instead of multiplying corresponding bits of rows and columns which can range from a few hundred as in case of WLAN to up to several thousands in DVB standards ,we just perform few lookup operations which are equal to the number of ones in a row . The H matrix being very sparse in nature has very less number of ones

in a row. Thus our method significantly reduces the number of operations that would be required for modulo two binary multiplications in syndrome check. 5. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS The decoder design using the improved algorithm was implemented in vhdl for LDPC code of code word length 1296 with 4 row processing unit and 8 column processing units. The code was implemented using a fixed point representation in 11 bits. The code was targeted at Xilinx virtex-5 XC5VLX110 fpga. The code was successfully simulated and synthesized using Xilinx ISE 12.3 and then implemented in fpga. The code was verified with large quantity of test vectors. First a randomly generated number is encoded to code word and this code word is passed through modulator and then through Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel to get code word with noise added to it. These code words are then passed through demodulator and the log likelihood ratio values received are fed to the decoder unit. The process involving the passing of code word through AWGN channel and conversion of received message into log likelihood ratio is implemented in MATLAB 7.6. The decoder achieved highest throughput of 522 Mbps. Table 1 shows the resource utilization. A considerable reduction in number of computation was observed with 20.8% reduction at low SNR(Es/N0) was observed and 87.6% reduction was observed at high SNR values. A negligible increase in Bit error rate(BER) was also observed during the implementation as shown in figure 5.
Figure 5: BER(bit error rate) comparison between standard sum product algorithm and proposed modified sum product algorithm.

2012 World Congress on Information and Communication Technologies

417

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:39:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Design

Standard Proposed

SPA

architecture

architecture For SPA

Slices FFs BRAMs Freq Throupu t (max)

16587 15023 208 110 Mhz 90 Mbps

3872 3544 70 246 Mhz 326 Mbps

Proposed architecture with modified SPA 4483 4789 92 228 Mhz 522 Mbps

Table1 : Resource utilization comparison between standard sum product algorithm and proposed modified sum product algorithm.
6. CONCLUSION
We proposed a modified sum product algorithm for decoding of low density parity check codes and a memory efficient decoder design for high throughput. The algorithm was implemented for WLAN standard LDPC code of length 1296 and results were compared with standard SPA implementation which show significant reductions in the computations. We also observed improvement in terms of throughput and slice count.
Future work will involve optimization of decoder architecture of better efficiency and implementation and validation of the proposed modified SPA algorithm for LDPC codes of different lengths and various standards to check the consistency of algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1] R.G. Gallager, вҖңLow-density parity check codes,вҖқ IRE Transaction Info.Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21вҖ“28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, вҖңNear Shannon Limit Performance ofLow-Density Parity-Check Codes,вҖқ Electron. Letter, vol.32, ug.1996, pp. 1645-1646.
[3] MacKay, D. J. (1999). Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 45, 399вҖ“431.
[4] M. Lentmaier, G. Fettweis, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., вҖңApproaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,вҖқ in Proc. Information Theory and Applications Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb.2009.
[5] T. Mohsenin and B. Baas, вҖҳвҖҳA split-decoding message passing algorithm for low density parity check codes,вҖҷвҖҷ J. Signal Process. Syst., 2010.
[6] R. M. Tanner, вҖңA recursive approach to low complexity codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[7] W. E. Ryan, вҖҳвҖҳAn introduction to LDPC codes,вҖҷвҖҷ in CRC Handbook for Coding and Signal Processing for Recording Systems, B. Vasic, Ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2004.

[8] J. Thorpe. (2003, Aug.) Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs (IPN Progr. Rep.). [Online]. Available: http://ipnpr.jpl.nasa.gov/tmo/progress_report/42-154/154C.pdf
[9] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, вҖңThe capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599вҖ“618, Feb. 2000.
[10] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, "Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: quantization and algorithm choices," IEEE Trans. Wireless Communications, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 3258-3268, Nov. 2009.
[11] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, вҖңFactor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[12] X. Huang, S. Ding, Z. Yang, and Y. Wu, вҖңFast min-sum algorithms for decoding of LDPC over GF(q),вҖқ in IEEE Information Theory Workshop,ITW, Oct. 2006, pp. 96вҖ“99.
[13] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X Hu. Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes. In IEEE Transactions on Communications, volume 53, pages 1288-1299, 2005.
[14] IEEE standard for information technology, Telecommunication and information exchange between systems. Part11 : Wireless LAN medium access control
[15] F.S. Smailbegovic, G. N. Gaydadjiev, S. Vassiliadis. Sparse matrix storage format. Proceedings of the 16th Annual Workshop on Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing. ProRisc 2005, pp. 445-448, Veldhoven, the Netherlands, November 2005

418

2012 World Congress on Information and Communication Technologies

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:39:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

