IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

6959

A Fresh Look at Coding for -ary Symmetric Channels
Claudio Weidmann, Member, IEEE, and Gottfried Lechner, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper studies coding schemes for the -ary sym-

metric channel based on binary low-density parity-check (LDPC)

codes that work for any alphabet size

, thus comple-

menting some recently proposed packet-based schemes requiring

large . First, theoretical optimality of a simple layered scheme is

shown; then, a practical coding scheme based on a simple modifica-

tion of standard binary LDPC decoding is proposed. The decoder

is derived from first principles and using a factor-graph represen-

tation of a front end that maps -ary symbols to groups of bits

connected to a binary code. The front end can be processed with a

complexity that is linear in

. An extrinsic information

transfer chart analysis is carried out and used for code optimiza-

tion. Finally, it is shown how the same decoder structure can also

be applied to a larger class of -ary channels.

Index Terms—Decoder front end, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, -ary symmetric channel (q-SC).

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE -ary symmetric channel ( -SC) with error probability takes a -ary symbol at its input and outputs either the

unchanged input symbol, with probability

, or one of the

other

symbols, with probability

. It has attracted

some attention recently as a more general channel model for

packet-based error correction. For very large , its appropriately

normalized capacity approaches that of an erasure (packet loss)

channel. In the following, we will only consider channel alpha-

bets of size

with

.

The capacity of the -SC with error probability is

-

bits per channel use, where

is the binary entropy function. Asymptotically in , the nor-

malized capacity -

thus approaches , which is the

capacity of the binary erasure channel (BEC) with erasure prob-

ability .

Recent work [1]–[5] has shown that it is possible to devise

coding schemes that approach - for large alphabet sizes

, with symbols of hundreds to thousands of bits, and

Manuscript received September 10, 2009; revised November 15, 2011; accepted February 03, 2012. Date of publication July 30, 2012; date of current version October 16, 2012. This work was supported by the Australian Research Council under ARC Grant DP0881160. This paper was presented in part at the 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory and in part at the 5th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, September 2008.
C. Weidmann is with the ETIS, ENSEA/Univ Cergy-Pontoise/CNRS UMR 8051, Cergy-Pontoise 95014, France (e-mail: claudio.weidmann@ieee.org).
G. Lechner is with the Institute for Telecommunications Research, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes Boulevard, Mawson Lakes 5095, South Australia, Australia (e-mail: gottfried.lechner@unisa.edu.au).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2208576

Fig. 1. Relative capacity loss

- of marginal BSC versus -SC.

complexity

per code symbol. The focus of this study

is on smaller , with symbols of tens of bits at most, although

the presented coding techniques will work for any

.

The -ary channel input and output symbols will be repre-

sented by binary vectors of length . Hence, a simplistic coding

approach consists in decomposing the -SC into binary sym-

metric channels (BSCs) with crossover probability

(1)

which have capacity

each.

We briefly study the normalized capacity loss,

-

, which results from (wrongly) assuming

that the -SC is composed of independent BSCs. For fixed

, we have

; so using binary codes with

independent decoders on the -fold BSC decomposi-

tion might be good enough for small (e.g.,

).

However, Fig. 1 shows that the relative capacity loss

-

- increases close to lin-

early in . For fixed , we have

,

which can be a substantial fraction of the normalized -SC

capacity (e.g., for

). Fig. 2 shows

that already for small , the -SC capacity is substantially

larger than what can be achieved with the BSC decomposition.

Clearly, there is a need for coding schemes targeted at “large”

(say

), but moderate (say

), which

are not that well handled by methods for large . For example,

to use verification-based decoding, the symbols should have

between

bits for short codes (block length

)

and

bits for longer codes (block length

) [1].

One example application, which also motivated this work, is

Slepian–Wolf coding of -ary sources with a discrete impulse-

noise correlation model, using -SC channel code syndromes

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6960

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

Fig. 2. Normalized capacity of -SC versus marginal BSC (error probability ).

as fixed-rate (block) source code. This can then be used as a

building block for a Wyner–Ziv coding scheme, where is the

number of scalar quantizer levels, or for fixed-rate quantization

of sparse signals with a Bernoulli- prior on being nonzero [6].

Clearly, will be only moderately large in such a scenario.

The capacity loss of the binary decomposition is due to the

fact that the correlation between errors on the binary subchan-

nels is not taken into account, i.e., since an error on one sub-

channel of the -SC implies a symbol error, the error proba-

bilities on the other subchannels will change conditioned on

this event. A better approach would be the use of nonbinary

low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over

[7]. While

that would take into account the dependence between bit errors

within a symbol, the decoding complexity of the associated non-

binary LDPC decoder is

or at least when using

suboptimal algorithms [8].

Instead, this paper focuses on a modified binary LDPC

decoder of complexity

. Section II studies an ideal

scheme using layers of different-rate binary codes, providing

the key intuition that once a bit error is detected, the remaining

bits of the symbol may be treated as erasures without loss in

rate. Section III-A then proposes a scheme using a single binary

code and develops the new variable node (VN) decoding rules

from first principles, by factorizing the posterior probabilities.

Section III-B shows that the new decoding rule is equivalent

to a front end (or first receiver block) that maps -ary symbols

to groups of bits and studies its factor-graph representation.

Section III-C analyzes the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT)

chart characterization of this -SC front end, which is shown to

allow capacity-achieving iterative decoders. Section IV briefly

outlines how to design optimized LDPC codes for this problem

and presents simulation results. Finally, Section V extends

these decoding methods to a larger class of -ary channels.

the th bit of the th symbol, while the corresponding channel

output is

, respectively, .

The key idea is to decode the layers in a fixed order and to

declare bit erasures at those symbol positions in which a bit

error occurred in a previously decoded layer. This saves on the

code redundancy needed in the later layers, since erasures can

be corrected with less redundancy than bit errors.

It will be shown that this layered scheme is optimal if the

constituent BSEC codes attain capacity. The intuition behind

the optimality of this seemingly suboptimal scheme is that once

a bit error (and thus a symbol error) has been detected, all the

following layers have bit error probability 1/2 in that position,

since the -SC assigns uniform probabilities over the possible

symbol error values. Now the BSC(1/2) has zero capacity and

so the concerned bits can be treated as erasures with no loss.

The decoder performs successive decoding of the layers,

starting from layer 1. All errors corrected at layer and below

are forwarded to layer

as erasures, that is all bit error

positions found in layers 1 up to will be marked as erased in

layer , even though the channel provides a (possibly correct)

binary output for those positions. Let be the probability that

the channel output is equal to the input in bit positions 1

to

and differs in position (i.e.,

and

). A simple counting argument

shows that there are

such binary vectors

, out of a

total

. The th binary subchannel is thus characterized by

(2)

(3)

Theorem 1: The layered scheme achieves -SC capacity if

the constituent BSEC codes achieve capacity.

Proof: We may assume an ideal scheme, in which all layers

operate at their respective BSEC capacities and correct all errors

and erasures. The

capacity is

(4)

Hence, the sum of the layer rates becomes

(5)

(6)

II. LAYERED CODING SCHEME

We study the following layered coding scheme based on bi-

nary codes. Blocks of symbols

are split into

(7)

bit layers

, and each layer is

independently encoded with a code for a binary symmetric era-

sure channel (BSEC) with erasure probability and crossover

probability , to be specified in the following. The channel input

symbol will be denoted

, where is

-

(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEIDMANN AND LECHNER: FRESH LOOK AT CODING FOR -ARY SYMMETRIC CHANNELS

6961

where (5) follows from (4) and the definition of the layered

scheme, (6) follows from

(which holds up to

, when

), (7) follows from the evaluation of

the telescoping sum and

, and (8)

follows from substituting (2) for .

As can be seen from inserting (2) and (3) into (4), the layer

rate quickly approaches for increasing , that is, for large

the last layers all operate at rates close to . Thus, an inter-

esting variant of the layered scheme is to use

BSEC

layers as above, followed by a single “thicker” layer, which

sends the remaining

bits (per symbol) over the same

. In particular, this could even be beneficial

in practical implementations, since combining layers leads to

longer codewords and thus better codes, which might outweigh

the theoretical rate loss. The next section will show that it is ac-

tually possible to reap the benefits of a single large binary code,

without any layering, by using a decoder that exploits the de-

pendencies among the bits in a symbol.

The layered scheme has several disadvantages compared to

the symmetric scheme presented hereafter. The main disadvan-

tage is that in practical implementations, each layer will need a

different BSEC code that is tuned to the effective erasure and

error probabilities resulting from the layers preceding it. Be-

sides causing problems with error propagation, this is also im-

practical for hardware implementation, since the required sil-

icon area would necessarily grow with the number of layers.

Another disadvantage is that for a fixed symbol block length ,

the layered scheme uses binary codes of length , while the sym-

metric scheme uses block length . The latter will provide a

performance advantage, especially for short block lengths.

bits and channel block length

bits. We assume

that the VNs in the decoder receive independent extrinsic soft

estimates of (that is, bit of code symbol/vector , for

) from the check nodes (CNs). These

amount to estimates of

or the corresponding

-likelihood ratio (LLR),

. (As usual, the notation denotes the block consisting of

all symbols/vectors except the th.) In particular, the extrinsic

estimate of is assumed to be independent of the other bits

of the same symbol so that we may write

In the standard case, these independence assumptions are justified by the fact that asymptotically in the block length, the neighborhood of a VN in the LDPC decoder computation graph becomes a tree [9, Ch. 3]. Unfortunately, the -SC VN message computation rule has to depend on the other bits in the same symbol, in order to account for the bit error correlation, and thus will introduce cycles. However, this problem can be alleviated by imposing an additional constraint on the code, namely that the parity checks containing do not involve any of the bits . This is a necessary condition for the aforementioned intrasymbol independence assumption and may be achieved by using an appropriate edge interleaver in the LDPC construction. Then, the cycles introduced by the VN message rule will grow asymptotically and are thus not expected to lead to problems in practice. As suggested previously, the properties of the -SC can be taken into account via a simple modification of the VN computation in the message-passing decoding algorithm for binary LDPC codes. We factor the APP of symbol as follows:

III. BIT-SYMMETRIC CODING SCHEME

Ideally, a coding scheme for the -SC should be symmetric in the bits composing a symbol, i.e., no artificial hierarchy among bit layers should be introduced (notice that the order of the bit layers may be chosen arbitrarily). We propose to encode all bits composing the symbols with one “big” binary code, which needs to satisfy just slightly stricter constraints than an ordinary code, while the decoder alone will exploit the knowledge about the underlying -SC. The key concept that should carry over from the layered scheme is that the decoder is able to declare erasures at certain symbol positions and thus needs less error correction capability (for part of the bits in erased symbols).
We present two approaches to describe the decoder for the proposed scheme: a bit-level a posteriori probability (APP) approach, which clearly displays the probabilities being estimated (and is more intuitive to generalize, see Section V), and a decoder front-end approach, which facilitates the use of EXIT chart tools. The model underlying both approaches is the same: the decoder will use estimates of the extrinsic symbol error probabilities to estimate the marginal bit error probabilities, thus “adjusting” the individual error probabilities of the binary subchannels.

(9)
where the factorization in (9) is made possible by the aforementioned independence assumption (the symbol denotes equality up to a positive normalization constant). Using the definition of the -SC, this becomes

We define the extrinsic probability that

(10) as

where we introduced (11)

A. Bit-Level APP Approach

for notational convenience. The normalization constant in (10) thus becomes

Our proposal for a practical symmetric -SC coding scheme relies on an LDPC code with information block length

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

Then, the bit-level APP may be obtained by the marginalization (12)
which may be written as

(13)

where

is the intrasymbol extrinsic probability that

, using no information on bit . Finally, we may express the a posteriori bit-level LLR as

(14)

The usual

is obtained from

via a sign flip,

.

The second term in (14) corresponds to the extrinsic infor-

mation from the CNs that is processed at the VNs in order to

compute the bit-level APP in standard binary LDPC decoding.

The difference lies in the first term in (14), which corresponds

to the channel LLR (which would be

in the binary case). When the extrinsic infor-

mation on the bits favors the hypothesis

, the

product will be small, and therefore, in (14) will be

close to zero, which is equivalent to declaring a bit erasure. This

shows that the symmetric LDPC scheme relies on “distributed”

soft bit erasure estimates, while in the layered scheme, the era-

sures are declared in a hard “top-down” fashion.

Equation (14) describes the modification of the VN computa-

tion that turns a message-passing binary LDPC decoder into one

for the -SC. The outgoing VN messages are computed as usual

by subtracting the incoming edge message from

;

also, the CN messages are the same as in the binary case. For

practical implementation purposes, (14) should probably be

modified (approximated) in order to avoid switching back and

forth between probabilities and LLRs when computing .

A final detail is the specification of the initial channel LLR

in (14), which is needed to start the decoder iterations. By

inserting the memoryless worst case estimate

into

(14), we obtain

which is exactly the channel LLR for the marginal BSC with

crossover probability

given in (1).

Notice that the decoder iterations are exclusively between VN

(14) and CN computations, like in the binary case. However,

computing (14) at the VNs requires the extrinsic information

(the CN messages) for all bits within a symbol; this might be

considered an additional level of message exchanges (specifi-

cally, plain copying of messages), but it does not involve itera-

tions of any kind. The complexity increase compared to binary

LDPC decoding is on the order of at most operations per VN,

depending on the scheduling. In fact, the marginalization (12) is

reminiscent of a combined detector and VN decoder for binary

LDPC codes that are directly mapped to larger signal constel-

lations [10]. Thanks to the symmetry of the -SC, here it is not

necessary to actually sum over all symbol values.

B. -SC Front-End Approach

The similarity of the bit-level APP approach to combined

detection and decoding mentioned previously points to a

different view on the bit-symmetric coding scheme, which

is to consider a -SC front end for a binary LDPC decoder,

similar to approaches for iterative demapping and decoding

[11], [12]. These techniques involve proper iterations between

the demapper and the LDPC decoder, being treated as separate

functional blocks.

The -SC front end takes into account the correlation between

the errors on the bit layers. Its factor-graph representation al-

lows us to formulate a message passing algorithm that computes

essentially the same quantities as the approach in Section III-A,

but opens the way to EXIT analysis and displays more clearly

the opportunity for further complexity reduction by appropriate

message scheduling.

As earlier, let denote the vector of -ary channel input sym-

bols

and let denote bit of symbol . In

the same way, the output of the channel is represented by

and , and the errors are denoted by and , respectively.

We assume without loss of generality that

, where

denotes addition in GF(2), and

, by extension.

Let

be the characteristic function of the code, which

evaluates to 1 if is a codeword and to 0 otherwise. Further-

more, assuming that the transmitted codewords are equally

likely, the APP satisfies the proportionality relation

The -ary channel is assumed to be memoryless (on the

symbol level), leading to a factorization of

as

(15)

where we used the fact that ministic way.

, and are related in a deter-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEIDMANN AND LECHNER: FRESH LOOK AT CODING FOR -ARY SYMMETRIC CHANNELS

6963

where

denotes the marginalization over all variables ex-

cept . In the same way, the message sent back to VN is com-

puted as

Fig. 3. Factor-graph representation of the -SC front end for symbol (the symbol index is omitted).
Given an error symbol , the bit layers are independent of each other, leading to

Error Patterns: The function node represents the probability that a certain binary error pattern occurs. In the -SC, every error pattern has the same probability , except the all-zero pattern that has probability , thus
if otherwise.
The derivation of the outgoing messages of leads to

if if

where is defined as

(16)

where

.

This factorization is shown for one symbol in Fig. 3, where

the edges on the right side are connected to the CNs of the LDPC

code, i.e., the factorization of the characteristic function

.

In the following, we will denote a message sent from a VN to

a function node and vice versa as

and

,

respectively [13].

Message Passing Rules: We apply the sum–product algo-

rithm to compute the marginals

for all symbols

and all bits , i.e., to perform a posteriori decoding for every bit

of the transmitted codeword. In the following, we will describe

the operations for a single -ary symbol and therefore omit the

symbol index for convenience.

First, we define the local functions and derive the mes-

sage passing rules for the function nodes

and .

Since the VNs have degree two, they just forward the

incoming messages, e.g.,

and

.

Bit Layer Channels: In the binary subchannels, , and

have to sum up to zero in GF(2); therefore, the local functions

are given by

where evaluates to 1 if the expression is true and to 0

otherwise.

Having defined the local function, we can derive the message

passing algorithm by applying the rules of the sum–product al-

gorithm. Given a message

and a received bit ,

the channel function node computes

The Appendix outlines the simplification of the different mes-

sages using scalar quantities and highlights the fact that these

are essentially the same quantities as in the bit-level APP ap-

proach in Section III-A.

Complexity: Clearly, the processing complexity of the front

end is dominated by (16) and is thus

per symbol, as in

verification decoding [1]. This means that the overall decoding

complexity scales linearly in the number of transmitted bits, in-

dependently of the symbol alphabet size . Complexity may be

further reduced by a constant factor (i.e., not its order) if the

front end messages are not recomputed on every LDPC decoder

iteration; this is often sufficient in practice.

C. EXIT Analysis of the -SC Front End

In this section, we analyze the -SC front-end using EXIT

charts [14], which will also be used later for the design (opti-

mization) of LDPC codes.

Let the a priori and extrinsic messages for the front end

denote the messages between the bit layer subchannels

and the bit nodes of the LDPC code, i.e.,

and

, respectively. For the EXIT chart analysis, the

front end is characterized by the transfer function

, where

and denote the a priori and the extrinsic mutual informa-

tion, respectively, between the messages and the corresponding

bits.

First, we derive the EXIT function of the front end for the

case when the a priori messages are modeled as coming from

a BEC. In this special case, the EXIT functions have important

properties (e.g., the area property), which were shown in [14].

In the case of a BEC, the variables are either known to

be error-free or erased, thus simplifying the computation of

defined in (16) as follows. The product in (16) has

factors,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

taking on the value if the bit is erased, 0 if the bit is not

in agreement with the received bit and 1 otherwise. If at least

one message is not in agreement with the received bit, a symbol

error occurred and

. Otherwise,

, where

denotes the number of erased messages.

Since

corresponds to

through (22) in

the Appendix, this case is equivalently described by an era-

sure. Therefore, the extrinsic messages can be modeled as being

transmitted over a BSEC, with parameters

and

given

by (2) and (3), respectively, since erasures correspond to the

situation in layer

in the layered scheme in Section II.

Its capacity is thus

(17)

In order to compute the extrinsic information output of the front end as

at the

(18)

we have to compute the probability

that messages are

erased given a priori mutual information . Let

denote the probability that an a priori message is erased. The

probability that

out of

messages are

erased is computed as

Fig. 4. EXIT function for the -SC front end with BEC (analytical) and

Gaussian (simulated) a priori messages for

(lower curves),

and

(upper curves).

Without iterative processing, the maximum achievable rate is given by . In that case, all a priori messages are erased and one has

(19)
The EXIT function for BEC a priori messages can therefore be computed using (2), (3), (17), and (19) in (18).
Theorem 2: An iterative decoder for the bit-symmetric scheme using a -SC front end can attain -SC capacity.
Proof: According to the area theorem for EXIT charts [14], the capacity of each bit layer is given by the area below the EXIT function, if the a priori messages are modeled as coming from a BEC. Therefore, the capacity of the overall channel is given by

which corresponds to the simplistic coding approach where the

-SC is decomposed into BSCs.

Fig. 4 shows an EXIT chart for BEC a priori messages. If

the -SC would be decomposed into BSCs (without iterating

between the front end and the LDPC code and without using

the layered scheme), then the value at

corresponds to

the capacity of these BSCs. In contrast, the area below the EXIT

functions corresponds to the normalized capacity of the -SC.

When using this front end with an LDPC code, the a priori

messages cannot be modeled as coming from a BEC. For code

design, we will make the approximation that the messages

are Gaussian distributed, which is a common assumption

when using EXIT charts. The simulated EXIT function using

Gaussian a priori messages is also shown in Fig. 4.

IV. LDPC DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION

After obtaining the EXIT function of the -SC front-end,

we can design an LDPC code. Code design is an optimization

problem that selects the degree distributions of the code in order

to maximize the rate, under the constraint that the EXIT function

of the overall LDPC code does not intersect the EXIT function

of the -SC front end.

Joint optimization of the VN and CN degree distributions is

a nonlinear problem, but it was shown in [12] that the optimiza-

-

(20)

tion of the CN degree distribution given a fixed VN degree distribution is a linear programming problem, which can be solved

efficiently.

where we used the fact that the integral corresponds to the defi- To reduce the optimization complexity and to obtain prac-

nition of the beta function. The last sum in (20) is indeed equal tical degree distributions, we choose three nonzero VN degrees

to the capacity of the -SC, as was already shown in the proof (cf., e.g., the approach in [15]). This allows us to perform an

of Theorem 1.

exhaustive search over the VN degree distribution, and for each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEIDMANN AND LECHNER: FRESH LOOK AT CODING FOR -ARY SYMMETRIC CHANNELS

6965

of

(the Shannon limit for

is at

). As a

comparison, we also show the bit error rate for a regular LDPC

code with

and

which has a decoding threshold

of

.

V. GENERALIZATION TO CONDITIONALLY INDEPENDENT BINARY SUBCHANNELS
The decoder in Section III is seen to easily extend to -ary channels with modulo-additive noise, where the bits of the noise (error pattern) are independent if an error occurs, i.e., if at least one bit is nonzero. This assumption leads to define the -SC with conditionally independent binary subchannels
- , with transition probabilities

Fig. 5. Rate of optimized codes versus normalized capacity of the -SC for

and

.

and denotes GF(2) addition (this definition encompasses all

channels satisfying the aforementioned conditional indepen-

dence assumption, from which it may be derived axiomatically).

The defining parameters are the symbol error probability and

the conditional probabilities , which are the bit error

probabilities conditioned on the event that at least one of the

other

bits is in error. The marginal bit error probabilities

will be

. Since the - is strongly symmetric,

the uniform input distribution achieves its capacity

-

Fig. 6. Bit error rate simulation for rate 1/2 LDPC decoding

. Marks indicate decoding threshold for regular code

, optimized code

and Shannon limit

.

When is such that

, the - reduces to indepen-

dent BSCs, while for

, it becomes an

ordinary -SC. The unnormalized bit-level APP (compare (13))

is obtained as

VN degree distribution we optimize the CN degree distribution

as described in [12] with a maximum CN degree

.

Fig. 5 shows the normalized capacity of the -SC and the ob-

tained optimized code rates (under the Gaussian approximation)

versus the error probability of the -SC for

and

.

Using this code optimization, we are able to design codes that

perform close to capacity over a wide range of error probabili-

ties for moderate . For the actual code construction, we used a modified version
of the progressive edge-growth algorithm [16], [17], which allows us to construct codes with a specific VN and CN degree distribution. To avoid (short) cycles in the overall factor graph, one has to ensure that the bits of a given -ary symbol do not participate in the same parity check. This can be achieved by using an appropriate interleaver between the -SC front end and

leading to the LLR expression (21) shown at the top of the next

page. The quantities

, and are as defined in Section III.

Like in the special case of the -SC, for

, the channel

LLR tends to a constant, which is equal to the LLR of the

binary subchannel conditioned on the occurrence of an error

on one or more of the other subchannels. The initial value of

can again be obtained by assuming a worst case of

the LDPC decoder. Another way would be to use the multiedge

in (21), yielding

type framework for LDPC code where such constraints can be

explicitly specified [9, Ch.7].

To verify our derivations, we performed bit error rate simu-

lations for an optimized binary LDPC code of rate

and length

, shown in Fig. 6. This code is opti-

mized for a -SC with

; thus,

corre-

spond to

-ary symbols. It has a decoding threshold which is the channel LLR of the th marginal BSC.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

(21)

APPENDIX
Simplification of the Messages: Since all involved variables are binary, we can represent the messages by scalar quantities. For the messages from and to the VNs of the LDPC code, we use LLRs of the corresponding messages

which is equivalent to level APP approach.

defined in (14) in the bit-

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Jossy Sayir for helpful discussions and for pointing out the similarity with iterative demapping and decoding.

REFERENCES

The connection with the bit-level APP approach is made by

equating

in the expres-

sion for ; the correspondence for

will be given in the

following.

The messages from the function nodes to the node are

defined as the probability of no error

and the messages from the function node are defined as the error probability

Using these definitions, we can reformulate the computation rules at the function nodes as

which corresponds to (11), and

(22)

For the initialization, we set all a priori L-values to zero,

leading to

. Inserting this in (22) leads to

Finally, the messages sent from the function nodes VNs are computed as

to the (23)

Using (22), the logarithmic term in (23) can be expanded as

[1] M. G. Luby and M. Mitzenmacher, “Verification-based decoding

for packet-based low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 120–127, Jan. 2005.

[2] A. Brown, L. Minder, and A. Shokrollahi, “Probabilistic decoding of

interleaved RS-codes on the -ary symmetric channel,” presented at

the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jul. 2, 2004.

[3] A. Shokrollahi and W. Wang, “Low-density parity-check codes with

rates very close to the capacity of the -ary symmetric channel for large

,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jul. 2,

2004.

[4] A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-approaching codes on the -ary symmetric

channel for large ,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, San Antonio,

TX, Oct. 29, 2004, pp. 204–208.

[5] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, “Analysis of verification-based decoding

on the -ary symmetric channel for large ,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 6754–6770, Oct. 2011.

[6] C. Weidmann, F. Bassi, and M. Kieffer, “Practical distributed source

coding with impulse-noise degraded side information at the decoder,”

presented at the Eur. Conf. Signal. Process., Lausanne, Switzerland,

Aug. 2008.

[7] M. C. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes over

,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.

[8] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Decoding algorithms for nonbinary

LDPC codes over

,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp.

633–643, Apr. 2007.

[9] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge,

U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.

[10] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-den-

sity parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.

[11] A. Sanderovich, M. Peleg, and S. Shamai, “LDPC coded MIMO mul-

tiple access with iterative joint decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.

51, no. 4, pp. 1437–1450, Apr. 2005.

[12] G. Lechner, J. Sayir, and I. Land, “Optimization of LDPC codes for

receiver frontends,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA,

Jul. 9–14, 2006, pp. 2388–2392.

[13] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the

sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp.

498–519, Feb. 2001.

[14] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information

transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.

[15] S. ten Brink and G. Kramer, “Design of repeat-accumulate codes for

iterative detection and decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol.

51, no. 11, pp. 2764–2772, Nov. 2003.

[16] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular pro-

gressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51,

no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

[17] X.-Y. Hu, Software for PEG code construction [Online]. Available:

http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEIDMANN AND LECHNER: FRESH LOOK AT CODING FOR -ARY SYMMETRIC CHANNELS

6967

Claudio Weidmann (S’90–M’94) received the Dipl. El.-Ing. degree from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH), Zürich, in 1993, and the Docteurès Sciences degree from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, in 2000, both in electrical engineering.
He is currently an Associate Professor at Université Cergy-Pontoise, France, and a researcher at ETIS—UMR CNRS 8051, ENSEA, Cergy. He holds a “CNRS Higher Education Chair” in telecommunications and information theory. From 2003 to 2009 he was a senior researcher at the Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (FTW), Austria. In 2009/10 he was with Vienna University of Technology, Austria, and the Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes (L2S), France.
His research interests include applied information theory and signal processing, in particular lossy (distributed) source coding and joint source-channel coding and decoding.

Gottfried Lechner (S’03–M’08) was born on August 1, 1975 in Vienna, Austria. He received his Dipl.-Ing. and Dr.techn. degrees from the Vienna University of Technology (Vienna, Austria) in 2003 and 2007, respectively. From 2002 to 2008, he was a Researcher at the Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (FTW) in the area of signal and information processing. Since 2008, he has been a Research Fellow at the Institute for Telecommunications Research (ITR) at the University of South Australia (Adelaide, Australia). He is a Member of the IEEE and a member of the IEEE Information Theory and Communications Societies. His research interests include sparse graph codes, iterative techniques, source and channel coding, cooperative communications, and optical communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

