A novel region graph construction based on trapping sets for the Generalized Belief Propagation

Jean-Christophe Sibel ETIS/ENSEA/Univ. of Cergy-Pontoise
CNRS UMR-8051/INRIA Email: jean-christophe.sibel@ensea.fr

Sylvain Reynal ETIS/ENSEA/Univ. of Cergy-Pontoise
CNRS UMR-8051 Email: reynal@ensea.fr

David Declercq ETIS/ENSEA/Univ. of Cergy-Pontoise
CNRS UMR-8051 Email: declercq@ensea.fr

AbstractŌĆöThe Belief Propagation (BP) is an inference algorithm used to estimate marginal probability distributions for any Markov Random Field (MRF). In the realm of Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes that can be represented by MRF called Tanner graphs, the BP is used as a decoding algorithm to estimate the states of bits sent through a noisy channel. Known to be optimal when the Tanner graph is a tree, the BP suffers from suboptimality when the Tanner graph has a loop-like topology. Furthermore, combinations of loops, namely the trapping sets, are particularly harmful for the decoding. To circumvent this problem were proposed other algorithms, like the Generalized Belief Propagation (GBP) that comes from statistical physics. This algorithm allows to absorb topological structures inside new nodes called regions. An advantage is that the resulting graph, the region graph, is not unique then according to its construction this region graph is a media for the GBP that can provide more accurate estimates than the BP.
In this paper, we propose novel constructions of the region graph for the famous Tanner code of length N = 155 by making use of the trapping sets as basis for the regions.
I. INTRODUCTION
A well-known problematic of the Markov Random Fields (MRF) is to extract their marginal probability distributions. This inference problem has numerous applications in computer vision, neural networks, image processing, statistical physics and channel coding. In [1] has been proposed the Belief Propagation (BP), known to provide accurate estimates. In the realm of error-correcting coding theory, the BP is a decoding algorithm that helps to recover a sequence of bits sent through a noisy channel. To this end the BP is associated to LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) codes that consist in applying artifical constraints between the bits, namely the parity-check equations. The sets of the bits joined with the set of the constraints form an MRF, called the Tanner graph, used as a media for the BP [2]. It is an accurate inference algorithm, meaning that it has relevant performance in terms of the bit-error rate (BER). However the Tanner graphs of most LDPC codes have loop-like topologies, that leads the BP to wrong estimates, making this algorithm suboptimal [3]. In particular, the combination of short loops, as the trapping sets [4], [5], are very harmful. To circumvent this phenomenon, we bring out that the BP is equivalent to the Bethe approximation [6], a method used in statistical physics to estimate averages of thermodynamics quantities by neglecting ŌĆō to some extent ŌĆō correlations between interacting variables [7]. As the BP, this technique suffers from the loop-like topology of the graphical representation of the problem, like spin glasses. It has been generalized to the Kikuchi approximation, a technique that consists in gathering interacting variables to absorb loops [8]. The resulting graph, called the region graph, is a media for a new message-passing algorithm, the Generalized Belief Propagation (GBP) that turns out to be more accurate than the BP provided that the region graph has absorbed damageable structures. Along the whole paper, we focus on the Tanner code [9] whose main property is that it can be entirely described by a set of known trapping sets. Then the

region graph can be built by working on them, that allows to lower BER of the GBP comparing with the BP one.
In [6] has been highlighted that the update equations of the GBP does not provide convergence of the algorithm therefore it was proposed to relax the update with the memory by the introduction of a uniform weighting. However, this choice seems quite restrictive. Here we propose a general point of view of the relaxation by the use of a damping factor that depends on the iteration, and we make reveal that it provides relevant properties of the GBP.
The section II deals with preliminaries about the LDPC codes, the BP and the trapping sets. In the section III, are exposed the origins of the GBP, the region graph construction rules. We resume with a classical construction and two novel constructions adapted to the Tanner code. We also introduce the general damping factor and the different evolutions we propose with associated results. In the section IV, we expose results about our novel constructions.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. LDPC Codes ŌĆō Belief Propagation
We consider N bits X = {x1, . . . , xN } sent through a noisy channel. In the whole paper, we use the additive white gaussian channel whose power is given by the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). An LDPC code of length N is modeled by M < N parity-check equations C = {c1, . . . , cM } such that:

ŌłĆj Ōłł {1, . . . , M }, cj(x1, . . . , xN ) =

xi

xi ŌłłNj

where the sum is computed over GF(2), and Nj is a set of bits that are the neighborhood of cj determined by the code. We define Ni the neighborhood of xi by the set {cj|xi Ōłł Nj}j. A couple {xi, cj Ōłł Ni} forms an edge eij between a variable node associated to xi and a check node associated to cj in a bipartite graph G = {X Ōł¬ C} {eij}ij. We call this graph the Tanner graph.
The BP is an inference algorithm that consists in passing messages along the edges of G. We denote mi(jk) (resp. nj(ki )) the message from the variable node xi (resp. the check node cj) to the check node cj (resp. the variable node xi) at iteration k, where a message is the
probability distribution of the receiver conditionned to the emitter. For any edge eij the update equations are [2]:

nj(ki )(0)

=

1 2

+

1 2

2m(ikjŌłÆ1)(0) ŌłÆ 1

Xi ŌłłNj \Xi

n(jki )(1) = 1 ŌłÆ n(jki )(0)

(1)

m(ijk)(xi)

=

li(xi) Zij

Cj

ŌłłNi \Cj

nj(ki) (xi )

(2)

978-1-4673-2054-2A/1u2th/o$r3iz1e.d0l0ice┬®n2se0d12usIeEliEmEited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u0n5e 24,2026 at 09:43:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE ICCS

where Zij is a normalization factor such that: m(ijk)(0) + m(ijk)(1) = 1. To initialize the algorithm, we use the likelihoods {li(xi) = pi(yi|xi)}i computed with observable nodes {y1, . . . , yN }: ŌłĆeij , mi(j0) = li(xi). The estimate of the marginal
probability distribution on xi, i.e., the belief on a variable xi is:

b(ik)(xi)

=

li(xi) Zi

nj(ki )(xi)
jŌłłNi

(3)

where Zi is a normalization factor such that: bi(0) + bi(1) = 1. The estimate of the sent bits are: ŌłĆi Ōłł {1, . . . , N }, x╦å(ik) = arg maxxi b(ik)(xi). The algorithm is stopped as soon as all the parity-check equations
are verified by the output bits or if the convergence is reached: ŌłĆxi, ŌłĆcj Ōłł Nj , nj(ki +1) = n(jki ).

B. Trapping-sets

When N is infinite, it has been prooved [4] that the BP reaches the

optimal solution given by the maximum likelihoods decoder because

the Tanner graph is a tree. However, in pratical cases, N is finite, and

most LDPC codes contain loops inside their Tanner graph making the

BP suboptimal [3]. Furthermore, the short loops and the combinations

thereof are very harmful. The trapping sets exposed in [5] are well-

known topological structures

c9

that harm the decoding. A trap-

x4

c6

x5

c5

c8

ping set TS(a,b) is a Tanner graph that contains a variable nodes and b unverified check

c4

x3

c3

c7

c2

nodes. We consider the case a = 5 and b = 3 whose Tanner graph is represented on Fig.1.

x1

c1

x2

Such a structure takes place in many LDPC codes, including

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of the TS(5,3) the Tanner code [9] of length N = 155 with M = 93. The

interesting property of this LDPC code is that it is entirely covered

by a set T of 155 trapping sets, i.e.:

ŌłĆcj Ōłł C, Ōłāt Ōłł T , cj Ōłł t

(4)

ŌłĆxi Ōłł X, Ōłāt Ōłł T , xi Ōłł t

(5)

The BER of the Tanner code suffers from an error floor [4] for high SNR values, especially due to the TS(5,3). A current problematic is then to lower the error floor. The finite alphabet iterative decoders are good challengers to solve this problem but we do not deal with these algorithms, we invite the interested reader to pay attention to the article [10] for more details.

III. GENERALIZED BELIEF PROPAGATION

A. Origins

In statistical physics, spin glasses are well-known Markov Random Fields (MRF) in which a problem is to minimize the free energy. This optimization has been demonstrated to be equivalent to the inference problem [6]. Most methods rely on region-based approximations, where the MRF is clustered such that the belief b(x) is a product of the beliefs {br(xr)}r over the clusters:

b(x) =

bcrr (xr)

(6)

rŌłłR

where {cr}r are overcounting numbers provided to account only once each variable of the MRF [11]. The Bethe Approximation (BA) [7] is a region-based approximation that takes into account the shortrange correlations between the spins. It can be modeled by a factor

graph that is identical to a Tanner graph if and only if the factors define hard constraints, which is the case of LDPC codes. Therefore, with computations detailed in [12], it has been concluded that the BA was equivalent to the BP. This equivalence provides a solution to the problem of the loop-like structure of the Tanner graph. Indeed, the BA has been extended to the Kikuchi Approximation (KA) [8], a method to minimize the free energy as the BA with the slight difference that it considers larger ranges of correlation, thereby can absorb loops. The associated inference algorithm is the GBP.

B. Region-graph

The GBP is a message-passing algorithm that runs on a Bayesian
network, namely the region graph, whose nodes are called regions. Each region r is compouned of a set of check nodes Cr and a set of variables Xr = Ōłģ with the following condition: if Cr is not an empty set then ŌłĆcj Ōłł Cr, Nj ŌŖå Xr. Here we expose the rules of construction then we present three different constructions, two of
which are our novel constructions suited to the Tanner code. 1) Rules of construction: The region graph is a graph of L
levels. We present the construction in two steps. The first step is the
construction of the first level: it is the choice of the initial regions set R0 = {rk0}k, i.e. the choice of the harmful structures of the Tanner graph that need to be neutralized. R0 is valid if:

ŌłĆcj Ōłł C, Ōłārk0 Ōłł R0, ŌłĆxi Ōłł X, Ōłārk0 Ōłł R0,

cj Ōłł Crk0 , Nj ŌŖå Xrk0 xi Ōłł Xrk0

The second step is the construction of the other levels
{R1, . . . , RLŌłÆ1}. To build Rl we search for the common variables
and checks between the regions of the previous level RlŌłÆ1. Thus a region rkl belongs to Rl if we can find an associated parent set Pkl ŌŖé RlŌłÆ1 such that:

ŌłĆcj Ōłł Crkl , ŌłĆrjlŌłÆ1 Ōłł Pkl , ŌłĆxi Ōłł Xrkl , ŌłĆrjlŌłÆ1 Ōłł Pkl ,

cj Ōłł CljŌłÆ1 xi Ōłł XjlŌłÆ1

The region graph reaches its last level RLŌłÆ1 when there is no intersection anymore between the regions of RLŌłÆ1. To each region r is associated an overcounting number cr Ōłł Z such that a graph of

regions is a true region graph if:

ŌłĆr Ōłł R, cp = 1

(7)

pŌłłR rŌŖåp

where r ŌŖé p means that Xr ŌŖå Xp and Cr ŌŖå Cp. 2) Classical construction: Proposed in [6], it consists in including
only one check node per initial region:

ŌłĆcj Ōłł C, Ōłā!rk0 Ōłł R0, Crk0 = cj ŌłĆ(rk0, rj0) Ōłł R02, Crk0 Ōł® Crj0 = Ōłģ

The next levels are constructed as exposed previously. As an example we display on Fig.2(a) the Tanner graph of the Hamming code, and on Fig.2(b) the region graph from this method. In this case, the region graph has its own topology. However, for most LDPC codes, the sparsity of the Tanner graph makes this method generate a region graph whose topology is identical to the Tanner graph one. Thus the GBP provides the same solution as the BP, which is not relevant.
3) Novel constructions: In the case of the Tanner code, we use the trapping sets TS(5,3) introduced previously to create the level R0. The complexity of the GBP grows as the number of variable nodes contained in the regions is increased. A complete TS(5,3), i.e. the TS(5,3) together with the neighborhoods of all the check nodes, is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u0n6e 24,2026 at 09:43:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE ICCS

x1

x2

x3

x4

x5

x6

x7

c1, c2, c4, c5, c7, c8 x1, x2, x3, x4

c2, c3, c5, c6, c8, c9 x2, x3, x4, x5

c1, c3, c4, c6, c7, c9 x1, x2, x4, x5

c1
c1 x1, x2, x3, x5

c2
(a) Tanner graph
c2 x1, x2, x4, x6

c3
c3 x1, x3, x4, x7

x1, x2

x1, x3

x1, x4

x1 (b) Region-graph Fig. 2. Hamming code

compouned of 35 variable nodes then any message from R0 to R1 amounts to 235 operations, which is not fair at all. Therefore, we must use smaller initial regions to lower the complexity.
The first idea we propose is presented on Fig.3, where each TS(5,3) is split into three initial regions, each of them containing two check nodes, one unverified check node, and their associated neighborhoods. We call this construction a triplets construction.

c1, c4, c7 x1, x2, x4

c2, c5, c8 x2, x3, x4

c3, c6, c9 x2, x4, x5

x2, x4
Fig. 3. Region-graph of the TS(5, 3) ŌĆō Triplets split
Each initial region contains 13 variable nodes, making the computation of a message from R0 to R1 of 213 operations, which is dramatically less than the complexity given by the previous proposition. Locally, the region graph of a TS(5,3) is loop free, that makes the decoding optimal. In [13] is introduced that a region graph can offer a GBP more accurate than the BP simply by adding to the Tanner graph super regions. Therefore, we only link the triplets to the check nodes of the Tanner graph considering that a region constituted by a check cj is actually {cj Ōł¬Nj}. Unfortunately, when we consider the whole code, the trapping sets are strongly correlated each other to each other. Thus, the region graph is not loop free, making the decoding not optimal. However, the construction provides a GBP that can offer better properties than the BP as we will see in the results part.
The second proposition is presented on Fig.4, where each TS(5,3) is split into three initial regions, each of them containing four check nodes, two unverified check nodes and their associated neighborhoods. We call this a triangles construction. Each initial region contains 24 variable nodes, making the computation of a message from R0 to R1 of 224 which is greater than what we got from the previous construction, but still lower than 235. The advantage of this construction is that it absorbs the short loops of the TS(5,3) and the unverified check nodes. As for the triplets construction, locaaly the region graph is loop free but embedded to the whole Tanner graph, a

x2, x4 Fig. 4. Region-graph of the TS(5, 3) ŌĆō Triangles split

TS(5,3) has complex links with its fellow beings. However, we can hope that it wonŌĆÖt be affected by trapping sets effects. We expose the results of these construction in the next section.

C. Message-passing

The GBP consists in passing messages along the edges of the
region graph. Unlike the Tanner graph, this one is a directed graph because of the parent links. Thus, we compute a message m(rkq) if and only if r is a parent of q, i.e. q is a child of r denoted q Ōłł Cr. We define Fr the family of r as {q|Cq ŌŖå Cr, Xq ŌŖå Xr}q, and its descendants Dr = Fr\r. According to [6], [11] the messages from a region r to a region q at iteration k are:

Lr\q (xr\q )cr\q (xr )

m(pksŌłÆ1) (xs )

xr\q

pŌŖéR\Fr

mr(kq)(xq) =

Zrq

sŌŖéFr \Fq
m(pks)(xs)

(8)

pŌŖéDr \Fq sŌŖéDq

where:

ŌĆó xr\q is the state of Xr\q = Xr\Xq,

ŌĆó Lr\q (xr\q ) = X xiŌŖé r\q li(xi),

ŌĆó cr\q(xr) = cj ŌłłCr\Cq cj (xNj ), ŌĆó Zrq is a normalization factor to ensure that:

xq mr(kq)(xq) = 1.

In [6] is assumed that the iteration indices of the messages at

the denominator must be the same as the one of mrq to keep

relevant performance. Though, it prevents from using an efficient

parallelisation of the computation. Simulations have shown that it is possible to replace at the denominator the messages mp(ks) by m(pksŌłÆ1), without damaging the results of the algorithm, it helps to get a faster parallel algorithm. For any region r at iteration k we compute the

beliefs:

b(rk) (xr )

=

1 Zr

Lr

(xr

)cr

(xr

)

pŌŖéR\Fr

m(pks)(xs)

(9)

sŌŖéFr

where Zr is a normalization factor to ensure that xr b(rk)(xr) = 1. To get the beliefs for the single variables we only need to compute

the marginal probability distributions of the regions beliefs. Thus for any region r:

ŌłĆxi

Ōłł Xr,

b(ik)(xi) =

1 Zi

b(rk) (xr ) xr\i

(10)

where Zi is a normalization factor to ensure that xi bi(k)(xi) = 1. The estimates {x╦å1, . . . , x╦åN } are computed then as for the BP.

D. Damping factor

In [6] it has been highlighted the fact that the GBP suffers from a poor convergence. Therefore the authors introduced a constant uniform damping factor w = 0.5 that helps to balance between the memory {m(rkqŌłÆ1)}rq of the algorithm and the update {Frq}rq by the following relaxation:

ŌłĆq Ōłł R, ŌłĆr Ōłł Pq,

m(rkq)

=

1 2 Frq

+

1 2

m(rkqŌłÆ1)

(11)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u0n7e 24,2026 at 09:43:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE ICCS

Here we propose a more general point of view by writing:

ŌłĆq Ōłł R, ŌłĆr Ōłł Pq, mr(kq) = wkFrq + (1 ŌłÆ wk)m(rkqŌłÆ1) (12)

where wk is a decreasing damping factor. The last value wK must be a null value to ensure that at the end:

ŌłĆq Ōłł R, ŌłĆr Ōłł Pq, m(rKq ) = mr(Kq ŌłÆ1)

The challenge is to find a suited sequence {w0, . . . , wK } that provides both convergence and relevant performance. We consider

four different functions displayed on the Fig.5:

ŌĆó (C) constant: wk = w0,

ŌĆó ŌĆó ŌĆó

(A) affine: wk = w0(1 ŌłÆ (P) parabolic: wk = w0(1 (IP) inverse parabolic: wk

KkŌłÆ),Kk )n, = w0 1

n > 1,

ŌłÆ

(

k K

)n

, n > 1.

damping factor wk

The balance between the mem-

0.8

C

ory m(rkqŌłÆ1) and the update Frq

A

is different from case to case.

0.6

P

In the case of a parabolic func-

0.4

IP

tion, the memory is quickly

0.2

highlighted at the expense of the update, whereas in the case

0 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 of an inverse parabolic func-

iteration k

tion the memory is practically ignored for a long time. The

Fig. 5. Damping factors, w0 = 0.85

affine coefficient enables a progressive oversight of the update

up to a complete use of the

memory. The constant function is what is proposed in [6] with

different values. We present on Fig.6 the evolution of the average Bit-

Error Rate BERk along the iterations with these different damping

factors for four different initializations w0. The simulations have been

realized with an SNR of 2.90 dB, i.e. at the end of the waterfall

where the trapping sets are really harmful. The first observation to

do from 6(d) is that a constant damping factor to the value wk = 1.00

provides the worst BERk meaning that the pure update is not efficient

at all as it was indicated previously. From Fig.6(a) joined with

Fig.6(b), it appears that a low value of w0 is recommended to get

fast convergence of the GBP. In addition, we see that whatever the

decreasing rule of wk, the value w0 = 0.5 lower the BER to a steady value at k = 19 unlike the value w0 = 0.25 has a longer

transcient phase before convergence at k22. Thus, the initial uniform

distribution between the memory and the update is the more relevant

choice. Furthermore, on Fig.6(c) and 6(d) we observe that for high

w0 the parabolic wk, that gives quickly a low wk, fosters the fastest

convergence compared with the constant, the affine and the inverse

parabolic one. As an example, we see that the parabolic GBP, i.e.

the GBP with the parabolic wk, converges at k = 22, whereas the inverse parabolic GBP converges at k = K i.e. when the convergence

is completely forced. Although the parabolic GBP is dramatically

faster, the steady value BERK are the same for both, meaning that

wk is a convergence booster. The second convergence booster is the

affine one, which is not surprising because it is a particular case

of the parabolic function with n = 1. Then one could assume that

increasing n provides faster convergence. However other simulations

that we do not present here do not confirm this, from n = 2 the

BERk are indistinguishable for the parabolic law. On the four figures,

we can extract, among other, a common property: whatever w0 the

parabolic GBP always converges nearly k = 20. This invariance is

crucial because it brings out that w0 is a degree of freedom for the

parabolic GBP, unlike the other decreasing laws.

BER

0.45

0.45

C

C

BER

0.3

A

0.3

A

P

P

0.15

IP

0.15

IP

0 0 20 40 60 80 iteration k
(a) w0 = 0.25

0 0 20 40 60 80 iteration k
(b) w0 = 0.50

BER

0.45

0.45

C

C

BER

0.3

A

0.3

A

P

P

0.15

IP

0.15

IP

0 0 20 40 60 80

0 0 20 40 60 80

iteration k (c) w0 = 0.75

iteration k (d) w0 = 1.00

Fig. 6. BERk of the GBP on the Tanner code with the triplets construction, K = 100

The surprising information from these observations is that they indicate that a fast and accurate GBP is enhanced by the memory and not by the update that defines the GBP itself. Thus, an assumption is that the GBP acts like a starter we must forget as quick as possible, it seems more relevant to use only a small percentage of the update for small value of k and to forget it as quick as possible. We do not display the result of the triangles contruction here to keep a reasonnable paper length, but simulations carried on this case highlight the same assumption. Simulations on other values of the SNR and other codes like the Hamming code made also reveal the same conclusion. It seems that the property of choosing a parabolic decreasing of wk with w0 < 0.5 to obtain relevant performance with few iterations belongs to the GBP and not to the code.
IV. RESULTS
In this section we expose results of simulations in terms of the BER between the BP and the GBP. We present first the results on the Hamming code to evaluate the classical construction. Then we present the results on the Tanner code with our two constructions to bring out their efficiency.
A. Hamming Codes
On Fig.7 is displayed the average BER along the SNR values for the BP and the GBP, used on Hamming codes of length N = 7 and N = 15. On Fig.7(a) we displayed the GBP with parabolic damping factor. It appears that the GBP is not very different to the BP except for high SNR values for which we see that the BER of the GBP is lower than the BP one. This indicates that the classical construction brings only a slight improvement in this case. Concerning Fig.7(b), the GBP reveals better performance for an affine damping factor, which is a parabolic one with n = 1, than for a constant damping factor w = 1. Once again, it is a relevant illustration of the poor result of the GBP pure update. Actually, these examples are useful to highlight the fact that the GBP turns out to be performant with the classical construction if the region graph is of different topology

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u0n8e 24,2026 at 09:43:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE ICCS

BER BER

100 10ŌłÆ1 10ŌłÆ2 10ŌłÆ3 10ŌłÆ4 10ŌłÆ5 10ŌłÆ6 10ŌłÆ7 10ŌłÆ8 0

GBP BP
2 4 6 8 10 SNR (dB)
(a) N = 7

10ŌłÆ1

10ŌłÆ2

10ŌłÆ3

BP

GBP (C)

GBP (A)
10ŌłÆ4 0 1 2 3 4 5

SNR (dB)

(b) N = 15

Fig. 7. BER of the BP and the GBP with the classical construction on Hamming codes

compared with the Taner graph. Moreover, for most LDPC codes, the sparsity of the Tannre graph implies a region graph whose topology is the same as the Tanner graph one. Thus in these cases, there is not any improvement.
B. Tanner Code
On Fig.8 we display the BERk for a particularly error event of 7 errors that makes the decoding by the BP oscillate because of the TS(5,3). We also have simulated on other noise realizations that harm the estimation for the same reason and we obtain the same results as what is presented. First of all, we can see that the GBP by the triplets construction has BERk values lower than that of the BP. Furthermore, it appears on Fig.8(c) that the inverse parabolic function implies errors from k = 22, unlike the parabolic and the affine ones.

0.3

BP Triplets Triangles

0.3

BP Triplets Triangles

0.2

0.2

BER

BER

0.1

0.1

0 0 20 40 60 80 iteration k
(a) Affine

0 0 20 40 60 80 iteration k
(b) Parabolic

This is another test to assert

BP

0.3

Triplets Triangles

that the parabolic damping factor is the best choice for a

BER

0.2

relevant GBP. A first conclu-

sion is that the triplets con-

0.1

struction provides a GBP that

converges fast, contrary to the

0 0 20 40 60 80 iteration k

BP that can only oscillate. The number of errors is 8 which is truly more accurate than the

(c) Inverse parabolic

BP even though one error has

Fig. 8. BERk of the BP and the GBPs on the Tanner code

been added comparing with the error event. Afterthat, considering the triangles construction

result, we see that the convergence is quickly reached even for

the inverse parabolic function. In addition, the number of errors

by this construction is 7 i.e. there is no more errors than in the

error event. Thus the GBP has a more powerful error correction by

this construction than the triplets construction. One would assert that periodically, the BP corrects more errors than the GBP, whatever the construction. Indeed, every 9 iterations in average, the BP reaches a BERk of 0.0322581, meaning that there are only 5 errors left. However, this result cannot be accurately predicted because the periodical aspect is not perfect. Moreover, the difference between this minimum value and the maximum average BER = 0.32 is too large to use this pseudo-periodical pattern as a result to assert that around 9 iterations the lowest BERk is reached. Therefore, the GBP is truly more reliable than the BP, because the BERk does not change. In addition, other simulations for other SNR values with different error events made us convinced that the GBP always gets a BER equal or lower than the BP one, making it an accurate algorithm, provided that it is run on suited region graph constructions as we proposed.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have exposed novel constructions of the region graph for the Tanner code, based on its trapping sets. The simulations we presented indicated that the performance of the GBP were improved by these constructions, raising that a triangles construction absorb the trapping sets better than a triplets construction. We have showed that the use of a damping factor is necessary to ensure relevant performance in terms of the BER, and that the classical proposition is not the best choice. More generally, our work enabled to understand that the GBP needs extensive research on its region graph to give interesting performance, that can go beyond the BP. Finally, the constructions we proposed can be adapted to any LDPC code whose Tanner graph can be represented by a set of trapping sets, making our studies relevant.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the French ANR Defis program under contract ANR-08-EMER-003 (COCQ project).
REFERENCES
[1] J. Pearl, Probablistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[2] F.R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey eand H.A. Loeliger, ŌĆ£Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 47, 2001, NO. 2.
[3] K.P. Murphy, Y. Weiss and M.I. Jordan, ŌĆ£Loopy belef propagation for approximate inference: an empirical study,ŌĆØ in Proc. Uncertainty in AI, 1999.
[4] T.J. Richardson, ŌĆ£Error floors of LDPC codes,ŌĆØ in Proc. 41st Annual Allerton Conf. on Comm. Cont. and Comp., 2003.
[5] S. Sankaranarayanan, S. K. Chilappagari, R. Radhakrishnan and B. Vasic, ŌĆ£Failures of the Gallager B Decoder: Analysis and Applications,ŌĆØ in ITA Workshop UCSD, 2006.
[6] J.S. Yedidia, W.T. Freeman and Y. Weiss, ŌĆ£Constructing free energy approximations and Generalized Belief Propagation algorithms,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 2282ŌĆō2313, 2004.
[7] H.A. Bethe, ŌĆ£Statistical Theory of Superlattices,ŌĆØ in Proc. Roy. Soc. London, 1935.
[8] R. Kikuchi, ŌĆ£A Theory of Cooperative Phenomena,ŌĆØ Phys. Rev, vol. 81, pp. 988ŌĆō1003, 1951.
[9] R.M. Tanner, R. Michael, D. Sridhara and T. Fuja, ŌĆ£A Class of GroupStructured LDPC Codes,ŌĆØ 2001.
[10] L. Danjean, D. Declercq, S.K. Planjery and B. Vasic, ŌĆ£On the Selection of Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoders for LDPC codes on the BSC,ŌĆØ in Proc. IT Workshop, 2011.
[11] P. Pakzad et V. Anantharam, ŌĆ£Estimation and marginalization using Kikuchi approximation methods,ŌĆØ Neural Computation, vol. 17, pp. 1836ŌĆō1873, 2003.
[12] A. L. Yuille, ŌĆ£CCCP algorithms to minimize the Bethe and Kikuchi free energies: Convergent alternatives to belief propagation,ŌĆØ Neural Computation, vol. 14, 2002.
[13] M. Welling, ŌĆ£On the Choice of Regions for Generalized Belief Propagation,ŌĆØ in Proc. UAI, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u0n9e 24,2026 at 09:43:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

