4606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

LDPC Decoder Using Pattern-Dependent Modified LLR for the Bit Patterned Media Storage With Written-In Errors
Pornchai Supnithi, Warangrat Wiriya, Watid Phakphisut, and Nattakan Puttarak
Faculty of Engineering, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok 10520, Thailand

The written-in errors in bit patterned media recording (BPMR) system cause the erroneous bits during the writing process leading to

the performance degradation. In this work, we propose the pattern-dependent modified log-likelihood ratio (LLR) usage in low-density

parity check (LDPC) decoder to reduce the written-in errors and also improve the write margin. Unlike the existing works, LLR com-

puted based on the input data patterns is used at the LDPC decoder for the cascaded written-in error channel (WEC) with the additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The proposed LDPC decoder outperforms the one with conventional LLR in terms of both the

write margin, when the SNR is fixed at 5.5 dB, and the performance of LDPC decoder. The SNR gain is about 0.2 dB at the BER of

.

Index Terms—Bit patterned media recording, log-likelihood ratio, low-density parity-check codes, written-in errors.

I. INTRODUCTION

B IT PATTERNED media recording (BPMR) is a promising technology to overcome the super-paramagnetic limit and

extends the areal density of magnetic recording systems towards

4 Tb/in [1]. The bit patterned media (BPM) is envisioned to fur-

ther improve the recording density to 10 Tb/in when using with

the heat-assisted recording technology [2], [3]. However, this

technology still has many challenges that need to be tackled; one

is in the writing process known as written-in errors [4]. Due to

the head field gradient, the inherent fluctuation such as the media

switching field distribution (SFD) of each individual island, the

demagnetization fields from adjacent islands, the random island

position jitter, and the write head offset, the errors may occur on

the previously written island and the target island.

To overcome this problem, recently, some works have pro-

posed the use of the binary and non-binary LDPC codes to cor-

rect these errors and improve the write margin in WEC. The

results show that LDPC codes can alleviate the written-in er-

rors [4], [5]. In addition, in [6], the improvement of LDPC de-

coder for the cascaded binary systematic channel (BSC) with

AWGN channel or cascaded BSC-AWGN channel has been pro-

posed. The LLR is modified at the LDPC decoder by including

the crossover probability of BSC. In practice, the WEC, when

modeled as a BSC, does not include the data-dependent nature.

Therefore, in this work, we propose to modify the LLR using the

written-in error probability

at the LDPC decoder based

on the input data patterns to reduce the written-in errors and im-

prove the write margin on the cascaded WEC-AWGN channel.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We de-

scribe the modeling of written-in errors in Section II, and then

in Section III, the data patterns that cause the different

values are analyzed. Section IV explains the proposed pattern-

dependent LLR modification in the LDPC decoder. The simula-

tion results of the performance improvement of LDPC decoder

Manuscript received March 02, 2012; accepted April 04, 2012. Date of current version October 19, 2012. Corresponding author: P. Supnithi (e-mail: ksupornc@kmitl.ac.th).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2012.2194991

using the pattern-dependent modified LLR are shown and discussed in Section V. Finally, in Section VI, the conclusions are given.

II. MODELING OF WRITTEN-IN ERRORS

The writing process in the BPMR requires that the head field

be large enough to saturate the target island and, simultaneously,

does not change the polarity of the previously written island

[7]. Due to the head field gradient, the inherent fluctuation such

as the media switching field distribution (SFD) of each indi-

vidual island, the demagnetization fields from adjacent islands,

the random island position jitter, as well as the write head offset

[4], [5], two conditions of the written-in errors can occur while

attempting to write the bit as shown in Fig. 1. The first con-

dition is the error on the previously written bit when the

polarity of the previous bit is switched to the same direction as

the head field when the write head shifts close to the previous

bit (left shift) is shown in Fig. 1(a). Normally, the main pole

of the write head is located above the bits and its trailing edge

is at the center of the target bit . However, the write head

offset and the island position deviation cause the strong effect of

head field gradient to the island . In addition, the other reason

that is considered for the probability of occurrence of written-in

error on is the magnetization of two neighboring bits

.

When the polarity of and are opposite to , the demagne-

tization fields of these bits add up with the head field gradient. If

the head field gradient, that is disturbed by the demagnetization

field, is more than the media coercivity of , the condition of

written-in error on is [4]

(1)

where

is the applied head field. is island pitch,

is the island position of defined by the island position de-

viation

normalized by .

is the head field

gradient. and are the demagnetization field of and

; herein, the sign of

and

depends on the polarity

of

. When

and have the opposite polarity,

is positive; in contrast, when

and have the same po-

larity, is negative. is the media coercivity and

is

0018-9464/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUPNITHI et al.: LDPC DECODER USING PATTERN-DEPENDENT MODIFIED LLR

4607

TABLE I

WRITTEN-IN ERROR PATTERNS AND

(WRITE HEAD OFFSET,

NM) FOR BOTH CONDITIONS OF WRITTEN-IN ERRORS

Fig. 1. Two types of write error conditions: (a) the written-in error in previously written dot and (b) the written-in error in target dot.

written-in errors either on the previous bit or the target bit, while

the demagnetization field from adjacent bits causes the various

written-in error patterns.

For the first condition with the write head shifted to the left,

the probability of written-in error on depends mostly on the

polarity of the adjacent bits and , so we consider the pattern

as shown in Table I. The value

of is increased

Fig. 2. Cascaded WEC-AWGN channel.

when and are opposite to . For example,

of in

the pattern 010 is higher than that in the pattern 001. Out of eight

the standard deviation of of . Here, the standard deviation

of

and are normalized by [4], [5].

The second condition is due to the right shift of the head

shown in Fig. 1(b); the error on the target bit being written

may occur when the write head shifts far from the target bit and

the head field is not large enough to write the target bit. The

worst situation that causes a high probability of occurrence of

the written-in error takes place when the magnetizations of two

neighboring bits

are in parallel with the head field so that

the demagnetization field reduces the head field. The condition

of written-in error of is expressed as

possible patterns 000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, and 111,

we can divide them into 3 groups, each with different

.

The left side of the table shows the written-in errors of the first

condition. The polarity of is switched to the same direction

as , so only four patterns have

.

For the second condition with the write head shifted to the

right, the bits

are considered. In this case, the written-in

error may occur on , the bit still keeps the previous polarity

after it is written since the head field is smaller than the media

coercivity of the bit. For example, in the pattern 000, we try to

write the 0 at ; however, when the written-in error occurs, the

0 cannot be recorded at . Therefore, the bit still keeps the

previous polarity that is 1. The

value of the each pattern

is shown on the right side of the table. The

values are di-

where

is the dot position of

magnetization field of and , and

of [4], [5].

(2)
and are the deis the deviation of

vided into 3 groups as well. Here,

and the average

are obtained from the erroneous recorded bits of each pattern

and all patterns, respectively. Note that the write head offset in

Table I is 1.3 nm.

Consider a BPM read/write channel as a cascaded WEC-

IV. PATTERN-DEPENDENT LLR MODIFICATION

AWGN channel in Fig. 2, where is the codeword that is

IN LDPC DECODER

transmitted into the channel and

is the sam-

pled readback sequence, where

and is an

AWGN sequence with a zero mean and variance of . Given

certain writing conditions, i.e., head field gradient, demagneti-

zation field, island fluctuation, and head offset values, the output

can be generated using the writing condition (1) and (2).

LDPC codes have recently been applied to the BPMR system with write errors [4], [5]. It has been found that soft iterative decoding of LDPC codes provides a significant coding gain in conventional magnetic recording system [8]. However, when applying LDPC codes to BPMR system that has the probability of written-in error, this code is unable to keep a good performance

III. WRITTEN-IN ERROR PATTERNS AND PROBABILITY OF WRITTEN-IN ERRORS

due to the high probability of the erroneous bits. We take into account the data-dependent nature of the prob-
ability of written-in error as follows. Firstly, the received se-

From Section II, the two main causes of written-in errors are quence is converted into bits using the hard decision. Sec-

the write head offset and the demagnetization field from adja- ondly, each three-bit pattern is considered whereby the proba-

cent islands. The direction of the write head shift causes the bility

of the middle bit is from Table I (given the spec-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4608

ified writing parameters), depending on the left or right shift

conditions. If only the range of shifts is known, for instance,

nm, then for each pattern,

of the middle bit can

be obtained from the averaged

of both sides. Finally, the

probability density function (pdf) of is modified by weighing

with

, depending on the hard decision. Therefore, we have

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2012

(3)

The term

can be similarly obtained. The log-

likelihood ratio (LLR) is defined as

(4)

Using Bayes’ rule, we obtain

Fig. 3. Written-in error probability

of each pattern.

(5)

The pattern-dependent modified LLR density is used for LDPC

decoding. Note that the conventional LLR is calculated by set-

ting

.

Oe/nm,

[1].

The left-hand side of the graph shows

of the first condi-

tion while the right-hand side shows

of the second condi-

tion. The legends show the patterns before the written-in errors

occur. If we focus our attention on

nm,

of each

data pattern is the same as is shown in Table I and

is at

the minimum at

nm.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

B. Performance Improvement of LDPC Decoder Using the

In this work, we start to explain the written-in error prob- Pattern-Dependent Modified LLR

ability for each pattern that is simulated from (1) and (2) in Section II. For this simulation, we assume that the island arrangement is a 1 row per track (1RPT) array and the areal recording density is 2 Tbits/in with the bit density of 2000 kBPI and the track density of 1100 kBPI. The island diameter, the island pitch, and the track pitch are fixed to 8, 13, and 23 nm, respectively. We also assume that magnetic field at the target track is not oscillated by the magnetization on the neighboring tracks because the read head has the side shield, and the cross-track width of read head is equal to the track pitch [4], [5]. Secondly, the performance of LDPC decoder using the pattern-dependent modified LLR are presented. In this part, the simulation system consists of high-rate LDPC codes and the cascaded WEC-AWGN channel. This LDPC code is constructed using the progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [9]. The Tanner graph has the column weight of 3, while the row weight varies from 26–29. The codeword block size is 4608 and the code rate is 8/9. For the LDPC decoder, we use the belief propagation (BP) algorithm.

The performance of LDPC decoder with the pattern-depen-

dent modified LLR for the write-error channels is investigated.

For this simulation, the user data sequences are encoded and

decoded with LDPC codes. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can

be expressed in terms of

, where is the

bit energy, is a one-sided power spectral density of AWGN,

is the variance of AWGN, and is the code rate. For each

SNR, the simulation is run until about 1000 erroneous bits are

obtained. Also, for all the curves, the number of decoding itera-

tions is 20. Fig. 4 shows the performance of LDPC decoder with

the conventional LLR LLR

, the modified LLR with

the average

and the pattern-dependent modified LLR of

three types. Type 1 and 2 represent the systems with the left and

right shift of the read head only. Type 3 represents the situation

when the range of shifts is known. Therefore,

of each pat-

tern is obtained from the left sides or the right sides in Table I

only.

Although in practice, a BPMR system will not experience

only one direction of the offset, these two cases are used to il-

A. Written-In Error Probability of Each Pattern

lustrate the improvement using the proposed pattern-dependent modified LLRs. The results show that the proposed methods

Fig. 3 shows the written-in error probability

of each give the SNR gains of about 0.1 dB and 0.6 dB, respectively.

pattern. The vertical axis shows

and the horizontal axis The conventional LLR approach obviously performs the worst.

shows the write head offset between the transition timing of Next, we consider a system with the head offset

nm,

the write current at the trailing edge of write head and the center denoted as

, so on the read side, the conventional LLR,

position of the writing target bit. In this simulation, the param- the average

, and the pattern-dependent

methods

eters are set as

kOe,

kOe,

are compared. For the average

, we use

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUPNITHI et al.: LDPC DECODER USING PATTERN-DEPENDENT MODIFIED LLR

4609

set as in the simulation in part A, except that the SNR is fixed at

5.5 dB. The results show that LDPC decoder using the mod-

ified LLR with the average

and the pattern-dependent

modified LLR can keep error-free over

– nm and

– nm, respectively.

Fig. 4. Performance comparison of the LDPC decoder with the conventional

LLR, the modified LLR with average

, and the pattern-dependent modi-

fied LLR.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this work, we have proposed the performance improve-

ment of LDPC codes using the pattern-dependent modified LLR

in the cascaded WEC-AWGN channel. The results show that the

proposed method yields the finest performance when compared

with the conventional LLR and the modified LLR with the av-

erage

. In addition, when we evaluate the performance of

the proposed method in terms of the write margin, the results

show that the write margin of pattern-dependent modified LLR

is the widest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Thailand Research Fund through the Royal Golden Jubilee Ph.D. Program (Grant No. PHD/0002/2554). The authors would like to thank Prof. Y. Okamoto and Prof. Y. Nakamura for the introduction of the written-in error issue.

Fig. 5. Comparison of the write margins in the LDPC decoders with the con-

ventional LLR, the modified LLR with average

, and the pattern-depen-

dent modified LLR.

For the pattern-dependent method,

of each bit is an av-

erage of both the left and right shift scenarios from Table I. It

is evident that the pattern-dependent method offers a gain of

about 0.2 dB at BER

. To further explore the effect

of the patterned-dependent modified LLR for LDPC decoding,

in Fig. 5, we evaluate the performance of the pattern-dependent

modified LLR in terms of the write margin. The parameters are

REFERENCES
[1] H. J. Richter et al., “Recording on bit-patterned media at densities of 1 Tb/in and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2255–2260, Oct. 2006.
[2] B. Xu, J. Yang, H. Yuan, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and T. C. Chong, “Thermal effects in heat assisted bit patterned media recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 2292–2295, May 2009.
[3] H. Muraoka and S. J. Greaves, “Statistical modeling of write error rates in bit patterned media for 10 Tb/in recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 26–34, Jan. 2011.
[4] Y. Nakamura et al., “A study of LDPC coding and iterative decoding system in magnetic recording system using bit-paterned medium with write error,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3753–3756, Oct. 2009.
[5] Y. Nakamura et al., “A study on non-binary LDPC coding and iterative decoding system in BPM R/W channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 3566–3569, Oct. 2011.
[6] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “LDPC codes for the cascaded BSC-BAWGN channel,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Sep. 2009, pp. 620–627.
[7] H. Muraoka, S. J. Greaves, and Y. Kanai, “Modeling and simulation of the writing process on bit-patterned perpendicular media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 3423–3429, Nov. 2008.
[8] E. M. Kurtas, A. V. Kuznetsov, and I. Djurdjevic, “System perspective for the application of structured LDPC codes to data storage devices,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 200–207, Feb. 2006.
[9] X. Y. Hu et al., “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graph,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:38:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

