1450

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2022

A Novel Base Graph Based Static Scheduling Scheme for Layered Decoding of 5G LDPC Codes

Kuangda Tian and Hao Wang , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes have been selected as the channel coding scheme for 5G new radio (NR) data channel. In this letter, a novel base graph based static scheduling (BGSS) method is proposed for layered decoding of 5G LDPC codes to accelerate decoding convergence and reduce the average number of iterations (ANI). In the proposed BGSS method, the update order of layers is determined based on row weight, column weight and number of punctured non-zero elements of BG matrix. Three optimization rules are included in BGSS to determine the order: 1) The layer with less punctured non-zero element is updated firstly. 2) The layer with relatively small row weight is updated firstly. 3) The layer which can utilize more recent information is updated firstly. The first rule has the highest priority and the third rule has the lowest priority. Simulation results show that compared with other scheduling method, the proposed method reduces about 1.1 ANI and obtains about 0.05dB performance gain for given LDPC codes.
Index Terms— QC-LDPC codes, 5G NR, layered iterative decoding, schedule optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were invented by Gallager [1]. LDPC codes can be constructed by algebraic theory. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes are a very important algebraically constructed LDPC codes. Because of the superior decoding performance, QC-LDPC codes have been adopted by many communication standards [2], [3]. Recently, QC-LDPC codes are adopted by 3GPP standard as the channel coding scheme for fifth-generation new radio (5G NR) data channel [4]. In 5G standard, the QC-LDPC codes can be constructed based on the base graph (BG) matrix, lifting size and cyclic shift factor.
For QC-LDPC codes, the layered belief propagation decoding algorithm is often adopted since it converges much faster than flooding belief propagation decoding [5]. During each iteration of layered decoding, the rows of parity-check matrix (PCM) are updated one by one in a fixed order. However, different decoding orders may result in different decoding performance. The order can be determined online or offline, also known as dynamic scheduling [6], [7] and static scheduling [8], [9], respectively. Generally speaking, the complexity of dynamic scheduling is much higher than static scheduling because dynamic scheduling needs to perform online computation based on the real-time received information, while static scheduling doesn’t. Therefore, in this letter,
Manuscript received 18 April 2022; accepted 27 April 2022. Date of publication 2 May 2022; date of current version 12 July 2022. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was K. Niu. (Corresponding author: Kuangda Tian.)
The authors are with the Huawei Technologies Company Ltd., Beijing 100095, China (e-mail: tiankuangda@hisilicon.com; hunter.wanghao@hisilicon.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3171658

we focus on static scheduling for layered decoding of 5G QC-LDPC codes. Some useful static scheduling criterions are proposed for 5G LDPC decoding [10], but the update order of each row cannot be completely determined by these criterions. Recently, least-punctured and highest-degree (LPHD) static scheduling is proposed for 5G QC-LDPC codes to determine the update order of rows [9]. The LPHD method outperforms conventional layered decoding algorithm about 0.05dB.
For 5G LDPC codes, the maximal parallelism of decoding is Z, which is the lifting size. That means we can update Z rows of PCM in parallel. We call these Z rows a layer of PCM in this letter. To achieve the maximal parallelism of decoding, we prefer to determine the update order layer by layer instead of row by row. Since a layer of PCM is “magnified” from a row of BG matrix, the update order of layers of PCM is the same as the update order of rows of BG matrix. In this letter, based on the structure of BG matrix, a novel BG based static scheduling (BGSS) is proposed for layered decoding of 5G QC-LDPC codes to determine the update order of layers. The proposed method includes three optimization rules (ORs). The 1st OR is that we give higher priority to update the rows of BG matrix with less punctured non-zero element. However, since the number of the punctured non-zero elements in many rows are the same, many rows have the same updating priorities after we perform 1st OR. Therefore, for the rows with the same updating priorities, we prefer to update the rows with relatively smaller row weights, which is called 2nd OR. After we perform 1st OR and 2nd OR, there may be still more than one row has the same updating priority. So 3rd OR is proposed: the row which can utilize more recent information is updated preferentially. The 3rd OR will be explained in detail in Section III. The simulation results show that the proposed method outperforms the LPHD about 0.05dB and reduces 1.1 average number of iterations (ANI).
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. QC-LDPC Codes in 5G NR
Let H be the PCM of QC-LDPC codes used in 5G. H can be obtained by expanding BG matrix based on lifting size and cyclic shift factor [4]. Two BG matices are used in 5G, which are called BG1 and BG2, respectively. Let M and N be the number of rows and columns of the BG matrix. The general structure of BG is shown in Fig. 1.
The BG matrix is comprised of three submatrices: core matrix, identity matrix and low density generator matrix (LDGM). Identity matrix and LDGM form the extension matrix. The first two columns in the BG matrix are punctured for further increasing the transmission efficiency. For BG1 or BG2, the number of rows is M = 46 or 42 and the number of

1558-2558 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:22:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TIAN AND WANG: NOVEL BGSS SCHEME FOR LAYERED DECODING OF 5G LDPC CODES

1451

Fig. 2. The correspondence between BG matrix and H.

Fig. 1. The structure of BG matrix of QC-LDPC codes used in 5G. The first two columns are punctured for BG1 and BG2.

iteration, the check nodes can be updated in a preset order. The algorithm stops when all parity-check equations are satisfied or a preset maximum number of iterations is reached.

columns is N = 68 or 52, respectively. In the BG matrix, each column and row correspond to Z columns and Z rows of H, respectively, where Z is the lifting size. The element in BG matrix is either 0 or 1. Each element of BG matrix represents an Z × Z all-zero matrix or a cyclic shifted identity matrix in H. Therefore, the number of rows and columns of H is M Z and N Z, respectively. The core matrix in the BG matrix contains 4 rows and the row weights of core matrix are much
higher than the rows in the extension matrix.

B. Layered Decoding for LDPC Codes

Layered decoding algorithm for LDPC codes can be con-
sidered as a class of message-passing algorithm in which
the check nodes and variable nodes exchange messages with others according to Tanner graph defined by H [5]. The
check nodes are updated serially in order to let check nodes
access the most recent messages in each iteration compared
with flooding decoding algorithm [11]. Let ci and vj be the i-th check node and the j-th variable
node in the Tanner graph of 5G LDPC codes, where 1 ≤ i ≤ M Z and 1 ≤ j ≤ N Z, respectively. The message transmits from vj to ci is denoted as mvj→ci and the message transmits from ci to vj is denoted as mci→vj . Let N (ci) and N (vj ) be the set of the variable nodes connected with ci and the set of the check nodes connected with vj, respectively. When we update ci, these two messages can be calculated by Eq. (1) (2):

mvj →ci = Cvj − mci→vj ,

(1)

mci→vj = 2 × atanh(

tanh(mvb→ci /2)), (2)

vb∈N (ci)\vj

where vj ∈ N (ci). N (ci)\vj is the set of variable nodes connected with ci excluding vj. Cvj is the posterior information of vj and it is initialized to the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of vj in the first iteration. In order to reduce the computa-
tional complexity, normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm is
proposed [12], in which Eq. (2) can be simplified to Eq. (3):

III. THE PROPOSED METHOD
For the 5G LDPC codes, let BGRi be the i-th row of the BG matrix. BGRi corresponds to the (i−1)Z +1 ∼ iZ rows of H as is shown in Fig. 2. For simplicity, we call the (i−1)Z +1 ∼ iZ rows of H as the i-th layer, which is denoted as HLi. According to the structure of 5G LDPC codes, the parity-check equations of the Z rows in the same layer are orthogonal. So these Z rows can be updated in parallel without readwrite conflict. Although row-wise scheduling, e.g., residual-
based dynamic scheduling method [9], can achieve better
performance and ANI reduction, it will increase the decoding latency significantly since we can only update H row by row instead of layer by layer. Therefore, layer-wise static
scheduling method is preferred. Since BGRi and HLi, where i = 1, . . . , M , corresponds
to each other one by one, the update order of layers of H is the same as the update order of rows of BG matrix. Note that, because of the QC property of H, we can investigate H by BG matrix [13]. In the proposed method, we optimize the update order of layers of H for layered decoding by analysing the features of BG matrix.
Since the proposed method is based on BG matrix, some
new notations should be defined to make the method more
clear. Firstly, let us construct a Tanner graph based on BG matrix. Let BGCj be the j-th column of BG matrix. In the Tanner graph of BG matrix, BGRi and BGCj correspond to the i-th check node C˜i and j-th variable node V˜j, respectively, where 1 ≤ i ≤ M and 1 ≤ j ≤ N . We define that C˜i is connected with V˜j if the element in the i-th row and the j-th column of BG matrix is 1. The set of check nodes which connect with C˜i is denoted by N (C˜i) and the set of variable nodes which connect with V˜j is denoted by N (V˜j ).
The proposed method includes three ORs to determine the
update order. The 1st OR has the highest priority and the 3rd
OR has the lowest priority. We adopt these three ORs one
by one until the update order of all rows can be completely
determined.

mci→vj

=

α

vb

∈N

(ci

sign(mvb
)\vj

→ci

)

×

vb

∈Nm(icni)\vj(|mvb

→ci|),

(3)

A. The 1st OR
According to the puncturing scheme of 5G LDPC codes, there are zero, one or two punctured non-zero elements in

where α is normalization factor and it is usually determined each row of BG matrix. Let P0, P1 and P2 be the sets of row

by simulation. When ci is updated, the posterior information indices of BG matrix which are punctured zero, one and two

of variable nodes in N (ci) will be updated together. In each non-zero elements, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:22:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1452

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 7, JULY 2022

The 1st OR is that we prefer to update the C˜i where i ∈ P0 firstly. After all rows in P0 are updated, we start to update the rows in P1 and so on. The basic idea of 1st OR is that if we update C˜i (i ∈ P2) firstly in the 1st iteration, the min and submin, which are the smallest and the second smallest absolute values of the messages transmitted from variable nodes to check nodes, are all zeros. In this case, the variable nodes cannot be updated. While, if we update C˜i (i ∈ P0) firstly, min and submin are not zeros. The differences between the “LP” rule proposed in [9] and 1st OR are that the “LP” rule is applied on H [9] and it does not consider the rows which include no punctured non-zero element while we apply it on BG matrix and consider the layers with no punctured non-zero element.
B. The 2nd OR
Generally speaking, the cardinality of Pj (j = 0, 1, 2) is not one, which means that the rows in Pj have the same updating priorities after 1st OR is performed. So we need more ORs to determine which row should be updated firstly.
The 2nd OR is that for rows in Pj, we prefer to update C˜i with relatively smaller degree. This rule seems like a “reversal” version of “HD” rule used in LPHD [9]. However, our simulation results show that it brings more performance gain and ANI reduction. The basic idea is that if the row weight of i-th row is relatively higher, C˜i connects more variable nodes than other check nodes. In this case, submin and min values will be relatively smaller. This phenomenon is also observed in [14].
C. The 3rd OR
If there is still more than one row of BG matrix has the same updating priority after 1st and 2nd ORs are performed, the 3rd OR will be applied to determine the final order.
Assume that by performing first two ORs, the temporary update order is {k1, k2, . . . , kM }, and the corresponding updating priority is {Pk1 > Pk2 > · · · > Pkp = Pkp+1 = · · · = Pkq > · · · ≥ PkM }, where Pki is the updating priority of ki-th row. The larger Pki , the earlier the ki-th row is updated in each iteration. Since Pkp = Pkp+1 = · · · = Pkq , we know that the update order of kp, kp+1, . . . , kq cannot be determined by 1st and 2nd ORs. We temporarily arrange kp, kp+1, . . . , kq in ascending order. Then we perform 3rd OR on kp, kp+1, . . . , kq to determine the final update order. The specific procedures of 3rd OR are shown in Alg. 1.
The input of Alg. 1 is the undetermined order sequence Sund = [kp, kp+1, . . . , kq] and the output is the determined order sequence Sd of length q − p + 1. In Step 2, we initialize a label LV˜i for V˜i as 0, where i = 1, . . . , N .
After performing 1st and 2nd ORs, we can determine that the indices of first p − 1 rows of BG matrix to be updated are k1, . . . , kp−1 in each iteration. Then in Step 3-5, we calculate the updating times of V˜i after updating these rows. If V˜i connects with an updated row, LV˜i will plus 1.
In Step 6-17, we determine the update order one by one. In Step 7, let LC˜i be the label of C˜i, where i ∈ Sund. We firstly set LC˜i as zero. Then in Step 8-12, we calculate LC˜t by

Algorithm 1 The 3rd OR in the BGSS Scheme

Input: Sund = [kp, kp+1, . . . , kq]

Output: Sd

1: Initialize Sd as all-zero vector of length q − p + 1;

2: Initialize LV˜i = 0, i = 1, . . . , N ; 3: for j = 1 → p − 1 do 4: LV˜i = LV˜i + 1, i ∈ N (C˜kj ); 5: end for

6: for b = 1 → q − p + 1 do

7: Set LC˜i = 0, i ∈ Sund;

8: for t ∈ Sund do

9:

for j ∈ N (C˜t) do

10:

LC˜t = LC˜t + LV˜j ;

11:

end for

12: end for

13:

Find the index kh of among LC˜t, where t ∈

SLuC˜nkdh;

which

has

the

maximal

value

14: Sd[b] = kh;

15: Sund = Sund \ kh; 16: LV˜i = LV˜i + 1, i ∈ N (C˜kh ); 17: end for

summating LV˜j , where V˜j ∈ N (C˜t). The larger LC˜t, the more recent the messages can be used when updating C˜t in layered

decoding. Therefore, in Step 13, we find the index of maxi-

mum LC˜t and mark it as kh. Note that, the maximum operation may return more than one index. In this case, we select the

minimal one. In Step 14-15, we store kh in Sd[b] and remove

kh from Sund. with C˜kh . We

In Step 16, stop Alg.1

we update LV˜i for until we determine

all V˜i connected the final update

order of kp, kp+1, . . . , kq. In Alg. 1, the times of performing

q−p+1

p

addition is

N (C˜t) + N (C˜kh ) + N (C˜kj ).

b=1 t∈Sund

j=1

The basic idea of the 3rd OR is that we prefer to update

the row which can utilize more recent messages. In this case,

we can speed up the decoding converge.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Simulation Results
In this section, based on the 5G LDPC codes, some simulation results are presented. The construction method of LDPC codes follows the 5G standard. The underlying channel is the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The baseline decoding algorithm used here is layered NMS decoding algorithm, in which the layers are updated in ascending order in each iteration. The maximum number of iteration is 15. We compare baseline (dash line), LPHD method (star line) and the proposed BGSS method (square line) in terms of block error rate (BLER) performance and ANI.
In Fig. 3, the code length of LDPC codes is 25344 and the length of information bits is 8424. The code rate is 0.33 and α = 0.625. BGR1 ∼ BGR46 of BG1 matrix are used during layered decoding algorithm. The modulation is quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK). Here we provide the performance of combinations of different ORs, e.g., BGSS-1 means that we only use 1st OR to determine the update order.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:22:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TIAN AND WANG: NOVEL BGSS SCHEME FOR LAYERED DECODING OF 5G LDPC CODES

1453

Fig. 3. The comparison among the baseline, LPHD method and the proposed method, where N = 25344, K = 8424. QPSK modulation is used.

B. Analysis
From the above simulation results, we can find that the proposed method can obtain more performance gain and ANI reduction when the code rate decreases. This is because when the code rate is relatively lower, more rows of the extension matrix in BG matrix will be updated by layered decoding algorithm. For example, when the code rate decreases from 0.45 to 0.3, extra rows, BGR30 ∼ BGR46 , will be involved in the layered decoding. Roughly speaking, most of these rows have relatively smaller row weights than BGR1 ∼ BGR29 . According to 2nd OR, these rows have relatively higher updating priorities than most rows of BGR1 ∼ BGR29 . After these rows are updated firstly, the decoding converge faster. So more performance gain and ANI reduction can be obtained.
Since the proposed method is only based on the BG matrix, we can optimize the update order offline for all code types of 5G LDPC codes and store the results in memory. In this case, compared with dynamic scheduling, run-time computational complexity can be avoided in the proposed BGSS method.

Fig. 4. The comparison among the baseline, LPHD method and the proposed method, where N = 18774, K = 8424. 64-QAM is used.
In BGSS 1-2-3, we adopt all three ORs to determine the update order. We can find that when BLER is about 10−3, the proposed method outperforms LPHD method about 0.05dB in terms of BLER performance and reduces ANI by about 1.1 in medium-to-high SNR range. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd ORs contribute about 11.5%, 76% and 12.5% to the ANI reduction, respectively. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd ORs contribute about 15%, 75% and 10% to the BLER reduction, respectively. As we said above, only by performing 1st OR or 1st + 2nd ORs cannot completely determine the update order. During we do simulation, we update the row with smaller row index firstly when more than one row has the same updating priority.
In Fig. 4, the code length of LDPC codes is 18774 and the length of information bits is 8424. The code rate is 0.45 and α = 0.75. BGR1 ∼ BGR29 of BG1 matrix are used during layered decoding algorithm. The modulation is 64 quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM). We can find that when BLER=10−3, the proposed method obtains about 0.03 dB gain and 1.2 ANI reduction in medium-to-high SNR range compared with LPHD method.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Draft DVB-S2 Standard: ETSI EN 302 307-1 V1.4.1. Accessed: Jan. 23, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.dvb.org/standards/dvb-s2
[3] Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Standard 802.16e, Feb. 2006. [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.16e-2005.pdf
[4] T. J. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[5] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[6] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[7] T. C.-Y. Chang, P.-H. Wang, J.-J. Weng, I.-H. Lee, and Y. T. Su, “Belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes with variable node– centric dynamic schedules,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 5014–5027, Aug. 2021.
[8] H. Li, H. Ding, L. Zheng, Z. Lei, H. Xiong, and T. Wang, “An efficient scheduling scheme for layered belief propagation decoding of regular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 8th Int. Congr. Ultra Mod. Telecommun. Control Syst. Workshops (ICUMT), Oct. 2016, pp. 397–400.
[9] B. Wang, Y. Zhu, and J. Kang, “Two effective scheduling schemes for layered belief propagation of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1683–1686, Aug. 2020.
[10] C.-Y. Liang, M.-R. Li, H.-C. Lee, H.-Y. Lee, and Y.-L. Ueng, “Hardwarefriendly LDPC decoding scheduling for 5G HARQ applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2019, pp. 1418–1422.
[11] J. Goldberger and H. Kfir, “Serial schedules for belief-propagation: Analysis of convergence time,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1316–1319, Mar. 2008.
[12] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[13] S. Chen, K. Peng, J. Song, and Y. Zhang, “Performance analysis of practical QC-LDPC codes: From DVB-S2 to ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 172–178, Mar. 2018.
[14] J. Frenzel, S. Mueller-Weinfurtner, J. B. Huber, and R. R. Mueller, “Static layered schedules and core-only parity check for the 5G new radio LDPC codes,” in Proc. 12th Int. ITG Conf. Syst., Commun. Coding (SCC), 2019, pp. 1–5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:22:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

