ACCELERATING AND DECELERATING MIN-SUM-BASED GEAR-SHIFT LDPC DECODERS 
lOGO Andrade, Gabriel Falcao and Vitor Silva 
Instituto de Telecomunica\oes, Dept. of Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Coimbra, Portugal 
ABSTRACT 
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) decoders typically imple­
ment a single decoding algorithm or update rule, which nar­
rows down the design space of the decoder and maintains its 
overall simplicity. However, gear-shift techniques combine 
multiple decoding algorithms, update rules and quantization 
of the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs), allowing wider design 
space explorations as more parameters can be fine-tuned to a 
particular need. Gear-shift LDPC decoders have been shown 
to improve both the decoding throughput and the energy effi­
ciency per bit decoded, while achieving similar capacity com­
pared to traditional approaches that only use one algorithm. In 
this paper, we incorporate gear-shift techniques based on the 
Min-Sum algorithm (MSA) and Self-Corrected Min-Sum al­
gorithm (SCMSA) using variable quantization steps. The pro­
posed design allows bit error rate (BER) performances close 
to the more powerful SCMSA running only a selected number 
of iterations using the most powerful update rule. 
Index Terms-
LDPC Codes, Gear-Shift, Min-Sum, 
Self-Correction 
1. INTRODUCTION 
LDPC codes are capacity-approaching coding schemes widely 
used in modem digital communication and storage sys­
tems [1]. 
Traditionally, the focus on LDPC decoding al­
gorithms is finding a numerically simple decoding algorithm 
which yields minimal BER degradation. Algorithms such 
as the MSA [2], SCMSA [3, 4] and improved differential 
binary (IDB) [5], to name a few, were developed with this 
principle in mind. Furthermore, quantization strategies were 
also developed, static and dynamic [6, 7], which minimize 
the required data bitwidth for the decoder design to have 
high coding gains. On the other hand, gear-shift techniques 
have been developed [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11], which combine the 
versatility of adaptive quantization schemes with different 
decoding algorithms, or node update rules, in order to reach 
more flexible tradeoffs in both BER performance, energy 
efficiency of the decoder, decoding latency and throughput. 
Existing gear-shift decoders work on the principle that a 
This work was supported by lnstituto de Telecomunica;6es and the 
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) under grants 
UlD/EEA/5000812013 and SFRH/BD178238/2011 . 
978-1-4673-6997-8/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE 
3004 
powerful decoding algorithm is not needed in all decoding 
iterations, but is required in order to improve on the least 
powerful algorithm work carried out in the previous itera­
tions. Typically, gear-shift decoders are accelerating - they 
move from the least to most powerful - whereas a deceler­
ating decoder would commute from most to least powerful 
algorithm. 
In this paper, we propose a gear-shift Min-Sum-based de­
coder which combines the MSA and the SCMSA. We show 
that the self-correction can be turned off for a considerable 
fraction of iterations, either in acceleration or deceleration. 
Furthermore, as the self-correction increases the bitwidth re­
quired, we developed an adaptive bitwidth scheme which re­
duces the average number of bits required to represent each 
data element on a standard decoding algorithm. 
Algorithm 1 Standard and Self-Corrected Min-Sum 
Initialization: 
(0) 
G:nm = rn 
(I) 
CN processing: 
;3={, = 
IT 
sign ( 0(i,-1)) x 
min 
10(i,-1) 1 
(2) 
n' EN(m)\n 
n m 
n' EN(m)\n 
n m 
BN processing: 
0;:) = I'n + 
m'EM(n)\n 
a;)n = o>i) - ;3,{, 
(i) {a, dH{sgn(o?@l)) EB sgn(O!,Vn)} = 1/\ 0?@1) f- ° 
G:1nn = 
. 
a;)n, for MSA and otherwise in the SCMSA case. 
2. L DPC CODES 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
LDPC codes are linear block codes defined as: c x HT 
= 
0, eEC, where H is the parity-check matrix which defines 
the LDPC code, c is a codeword from the set C of possible 
codewords. H is an adjacency matrix to the bipartite graph 
with columns defining Bit Nodes (BNs) and rows defining 
Check Nodes (CNs) [12]. 
LDPC soft-decoding algorithms are based on message­
passing over the Tanner graph of the code [12] and the MSA 
and the SCMSA are formalized in Algorithm 1 [3, 4]. The 
ICASSP2015 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:06:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
ffi 10[ 
-
II 
- .-n- - MSA 02.2 
Region\ 
-
of 
\ 
Interest 
\ 
- \ -MSA03.2 
MSA04.2 
 
\ .YZ 
__ 4-#$%& 
10-" 
MSA 05.2 
- -+- - MSA 06.2 
--<3- SCMSA 02.2 
10-" 
-8- SCMSA 03.2 
]SCMSA04.2 
SCMSA05.2 
\ 
" 
-t- SCMSA 06.2 
'+ 
10-12L-__ " __  __  __  __  __  __ ! __   __ _ 
-1.8 
-1.6 
-1.4 
-1.2 
-1 
-0.8 
-0.6 
-0.4 
SNR [dB) 
-0.2 
o 
Fig. 1. ROI of the gear-shift decoder is located between the 
SCMSA BER curve and the MSA. The BER curves were 
plotted for the DVB-S2 rate 1/3, N = 64800 bits. 
channel demodulator produces a likelihood estimate - in this 
case an LLR - on the received bits, 'In (1). CNs will gather 
a<n messages from their adjacent nodes - denoted as the set 
N(m) - and will produce f3 messages (2). Likewise, BN will 
gather f3 messages to produce new estimates on a messages. 
CN processing is the same for the MSA and the SCMSA (2); 
and the BN processing is defined by (4) and by (5), respec­
tively for the former and the latter. 
3. GEAR-SHIFT L DPC DECODERS 
The region of interest (ROI) of the gear-shift decoder that 
combines the standard and the self-corrected MSA is shown 
in Figure 1. 
The objective of the gear-shift design is to 
achieve the BER performance of the most powerful update 
rule, i.e. the SCMSA, while running the least powerful up­
date rule - the MSA - for the longest number of iterations 
possible. As such, the ROI is delimited by the SCMSA and 
the MSA BER performance.Throughout this work, we refer 
to the fixed-point precision as Qx.y, with x the number of 
integer bits including the sign bit, y the number of decimal 
bits and x+y the bitwidth of the LLR. 
3.1. Variable Quantization Bits 
LDPC decoders only require a limited number of fixed­
precision bits to operate within a negligible margin of high 
precision floating-point equivalent BER [4, 6]. This obser­
vation, compounded by the fact that for low signal-to-noise 
ratio (SNR) values the magnitude of LLRs is also low and 
take a considerable number of iterations to grow in magnitude 
before being clipped due to the limited precision, allows us to 
3005 
explore narrower bitwidths for the initial decoding iterations. 
While a dynamic LLR quantization watchdog could be em­
ployed to adjust in the face of variable SNR conditions, we 
prefer to keep the simplicity of the decoding design. We stat­
ically define a threshold for increasing the bitwidth of each 
internal data word, by performing an a-priori sweep of the 
most suitable threshold candidates, which commutes from a 
low precision bitwidth blow to a high precision bitwidth bhigh 
at iteration threshold tb. A natural advantage of using the 
self-correction as a gear in the decoding process is the ability 
to reduce the required bitwidth from Xf to Xs = Xf - 2 [4]. 
While in bit-parallel implementations this comes as reduc­
ing the switching activity on said wires to 0, on bit-serial or 
pulse-width implementations, there is a reduction of at least 
2 clock cycles when the self-correction is deactivated, and 
a greater reduction is possible when combined with variable 
quantization. 
3.2. Gearbox: Standard and S elf-Correction 
Activation and deactivation of the self-correction on the MSA 
can be seen as shifting a gear. When the least powerful de­
coder, in this case the MSA, is running in the first iterations 
and the most powerful is running at trailing iterations, we can 
stretch the metaphor into an accelerating decoder, whereas the 
opposite can be though as a decelerating decoder. The ratio­
nale for development of an accelerating decoder and a decel­
erating one takes advantage of the following aspects, provided 
that the SNR of the channel is no known to the LDPC decoder. 
For low SNR values, LLRs are also low and thus, the ad­
vantage of a decelerating decoder comes from its increased 
decoding capabilities in its initial iterations. When LLRs have 
grown, the decoder then shifts into the algorithm with the 
least decoding capabilities, as it will not face a significant 
degradation of BER. On the other hand, for high SNR condi­
tions, both decoders might be at the error-floor region, which 
as seen in Figure 1 is around 10-12 for both the MSA and 
the SCMSA decoding algorithms. Thus, the accelerating de­
coder will run the least powerful decoder and to make sure 
that the BER is improved for SNR values in the ROI, the de­
coder "revs up " by activating the self-correction. The draw­
back of the decelerating approach is the breaking of the prin­
ciple of only consuming more energy once a certain threshold 
has been reached on the least powerful update rule and the 
transmitted word has not been successfully decoded. 
As done previously with the quantization bits threshold, 
we performed an a-priori sweep exploring the threshold of 
acceleration and deceleration. The gear-shift decoder com­
mutes from the least to the most powerful algorithm, turning 
on the self-correction at the trailing decoding iterations, when 
accelerating, and does the opposite when decelerating. The 
a-priori sweep found the most suitable threshold, ta, to per­
form the activation or deactivation of the self-correction. We 
designate this as shifting a gear, and thus, the combined effect 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:06:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 2. BER of the (A)ccelerating and the (D)ecelerating gear-shift decoders. 
of the standard MSA and the SCMSA can be thought of as a 
gearbox. The remaining challenge is then to combine both the 
quantization and the gear-changing thresholds. 
4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Experimental validation was performed using the the DVB-S2 
N = 64, 800 bits rate 1/3 LDPC code, running a maximum 
of 50 decoding iterations [13, 14]. The architecture of the 
decoder is based on the bit-parallel architecture in [15]. 
4.1. Accelerating vs. Decelerating Decoding 
The BER performance of the accelerating and decelerating 
decoders without variable quantization are shown in Fig­
ure 2a). As seen, there are clear differences between the BER 
of each strategy. Whereas the decelerating decoders - run­
ning the SCMSA and then the MSA - show a degrading BER 
when compared to the SCMSA BER, they follow a similar 
trajectory and gradient. The accelerating decoders on the 
other hand, show both BER trajectory and gradient closer to 
that of the MSA BER. This suggests that the initial decoding 
iterations heavily impact on the final BER. Running the more 
powerful SCMSA in the beggining yielded better BER than 
the least powerful MSA algorithm first. 
4.2. Variable Quantization Shifting 
Introducing a two-step variable quantization of the LLRs's 
bitwitdth in the previous design yields the BER performance 
shown in Figure 2b), for the best performing combinations 
of (ta, tb)=(20, 15), combinations of low precision bitwidths 
blow, bhighEQ{ 4.2, 5.2, 6.2}. A further BER degradation is 
observed for both gear-shift strategies. Namely, the domi­
nant effect in terms of BER curve trajectory on high SNR 
regions is the bitwidth selected as the lowest precision.The 
3006 
decoder using (blow, bhigh) = (Q4.2, Q5.2) yields the same 
error-floor as the (blow, bhigh) = (Q4.2, Q6.2). 
Table 1. Difference (%) in decoding iterations of the gear­
shift decoders A3 and D3 compared to SCMSA and MSA. 
AlgmsISCMSA -A31MSA -A31SCMSA -D31MSA -D3 
-1.00 
-8.97 
3.04 
-LO.08 
1.04 
-0.90 
-22.41 
0.58 
-18.39 
0.48 
-0.80 
-24.37 
3.9C 
-21.05 
2.13 
-0.70 
-20.25 
-0.45 
-21.89 
-6.94 
-0.60 
-18.89 
-4.91 
-22.65 
-14.08 
-0.50 
-18.75 
-8.37 
-23.5f 
-19.38 
5. COM P LEXITY ANALYSIS 
The proposed gear-shift decoder is implementable following 
the architecture shown in Figure 3 [15]. Essentially, the self­
correction is appended to the end of the datapath of the BN 
unit. On the CN unit, there is only one operation related with 
the knowledge of a previously introduced erasure [4]. The 
data representation is such that 2 extra bits are required, one 
for sgn( Q;; 1») and an erasure flag stating whether Q;; 1) = 
O. The complexity of operating this particular LDPC archi­
tecture is shown in Table 2, expressed in numeric operations 
and consequent logic blocks required. As seen, an extra com­
parator, XOR and AND are required to implement the self­
correction, plus an additional 2 bits making the bitwidth of the 
LLR word X f. The decoding unit runs in MSA mode, when 
the selector s defines Q<n as output. In Table 1, the number 
of decoding iterations required for the A3 and D3 decoders is 
shown, and understandably, is greater than what the SCMSA 
requires (columns SCMSA - {A3, D3})' In the waterfall re­
gion ([-1.0, -0.80] dB), it is also higher than what the MSA 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:06:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
eN Unit Dalapath 
X,bilS 
‚ ,§ƒ„ 
-. 
Min-Sum and Self-Corrected Min-Sum data path 
- -.. Self-Corrected Min-Sum exclusive data path 
Fig. 3. Datapath of the BN and the CN units. As shown, the self-correction can be appended to the MSA unit, and can be turned 
on or off according to the update rule in place by fixing the MUX selector s to let Ocmn = 0mn. 
Table 2. Numerical complexity of the MSA and SCMSA and hardware resources of their implementation [15]. 
Operations/Algorithm 
CN 
Comparisons 
XOR 
MSA & SCMSA (2) 
2dv - 2 
dv - 1 
BN 
Additions 
XOR 
MSA (4) 
dv 
-
SCMSA (5) 
dv 
dv 
*dv and de are the BN and CN weight respectively [4] 
requires (columns MSA - {A3, D3}), since the difference in 
iterations is positive. However, in the range [-0.7, oo[ dB, the 
gear-shift designs start running less iterations than the MSA. 
Whenever this difference is negative, the gear-shift decoder is 
running with lower efficiency as it requires more decoding it­
erations to decode successfully. Namely, in the waterfall -1.0 
dB data point, the improvement is in the order 2"-'4 % less de­
coding iterations required as opposed to MSA approaches, re­
spectively for the accelerating and the decelerating gear-shift 
decoder. However, there will be an increase in the number 
of decoding iterations as the SNR conditions improve and the 
decoders enter the error-floor region. 
6. RELATION TO PRIOR WORK 
The concept of gear-shift decoding has been introduced in [8] 
and has seen considerable improvements for hardware real­
ization using bit-serial techniques and on digit-online de­
coders [9, 10]. 
The latter works focus also on variable 
bitwidth representations of data to achieve higher power 
savings, the main subject of [6, 7]. In [11], a tri-mode decod­
ing which combines the versatility of 3 decoding algorithms 
to achieve a good tradeoff between coding losses and power 
gains is proposed, which combines distinct update rules. Tun­
ing of the data representation bitwidth was explored similarly 
to [6, 7, 10], with varying degrees of success. When us­
ing algorithms with very low bitwidth requirements, higher 
gains are possible when compared to the proposed Min-Sum-
3007 
Resources/Algorithm 
CN 
I 
BN 
Shared MSA and SCMSA Blocks 
FIFO depth 
max{dc} 
max{db} 
Registers 
6 
2 
Selectors 
4 
2 
XORs 
2 
-
dv 
Self-Correction 
Comparator 
I 
I: 
XOR 
-
AND 
-
based approach which is more sensItIve to low bitwidths. 
The proposed gear-shift decoder allows for portions of the 
hardware to have no switching activity, thereby increasing its 
energy efficiency without the implementation of a significant 
logic control module [10], and without the need to imple­
ment hardware modules which can be used by widely distinct 
update rules [10, 11]. Moreover, the characteristics of the 
proposed gear-shift MSA decoder exhibit a better decoding 
performance when decelerating instead of when accelerating, 
in the waterfall and beginning of error floor region, as it is 
commonly found in prior work. 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
The presented decoder provides a tradeoff between the MSA 
and SCMSA BER, depending on the set of parameters cho­
sen: data bitwidth and how long and how is the self-correction 
active - accelerating or decelerating the decoding procedure. 
In the proposed architecture, the self-correction consumes a 
low number of extra logic modules and negligible control 
is required. Bitwidth requirements increase due to the self­
correction, but this does not add to the energy required to de­
code each bit when running the MSA. The benefits of this 
approach are not limited to bit-parallel implementations, but 
are also applicable to pulse-width decoders. Furthermore, the 
MSA-based gear-shift decoder exhibits a better performance 
when decelerating rather than when accelerating. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:06:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, 1963. 
[2] N. Wiberg, H.-a. Loeliger, and R. Kotter, "Codes and 
Iterative Decoding on General Graphs, " in IEEE Symp. 
on In! Theory, 1995, p. 468. 
[3] V. Savin, "Self-corrected Min-Sum Decoding of LDPC 
codes, " in IEEE Symp. on In! Theory, 2008, pp. 146-
150. 
[4] J. Andrade, G. Falcao, 
V. Silva, 
J. P. Barreto, 
N. Goncalves, and V. Savin, "Near-LSPA performance 
at MSA complexity, " in Proc. IEEE Int. Con! on Com­
mun., 2013, pp. 3281-3285. 
[5] Kevin Cushon, Saied Hemati, Camille Leroux, Shie 
Mannor, and Warren J. Gross, 
"High-Throughput 
Energy-Efficient LDPC Decoders Using Differential Bi­
nary Message Passing, " IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, 
vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 619-631, 2014. 
[6] T. Mohsenin, H. Shirani-mehr, and B. M. Baas, "LDPC 
Decoder with an Adaptive Word width Datapath for En­
ergy and BER Co-Optimization, " Hindawi Journal of 
VLSI Design, vol. 20l3, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 20l3. 
[7] C.-H. Chung, Y.-L. Ueng, M.-C. Lu, and M.-C. Lin, 
"Adaptive quantization for low-density-parity-check de­
coders, " in IEEE Symp. on In! Theory and its Applica­
tions, 2010, pp. 13-18. 
[8] M. Ardakani and F. R Kschischang, "Gear-shift Decod­
ing, " IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1235-
1242, 2006. 
3008 
[9] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R Kschischang, "A 
Bit-serial Approximate Min-sum LDPC Decoder and 
FPGA Implementation, " in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on 
Circuits and Systems, 2006, pp. 4-pp. 
[10] K. Cushon, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. 1. Gross, 
"Energy-efficient gear-shift LDPC decoders, " in Proc. 
IEEE Int. Con! on Application-specific Systems, Archi­
tectures and Processors. IEEE, 2014, pp. 219-223. 
[11] X. Chen, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, 
"FPGA­
based Low-complexity High-throughput Tri-mode De­
coder for Quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes, " in Annual Allter­
ton Con! on Communication, Control and Computing, 
2009, pp. 600-606. 
[12] M. Tanner, "A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity 
Codes, " IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 
533-547, Sep 1981. 
[13] A. Morello and V. Mignone, 
"DVB-S2: the Second 
Generation Standard for Satellite Broad-band Services, " 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, 2006. 
[14] G. Falcao, J. Andrade, V. Silva, and L. Sousa, "GPU­
based DVB-S2 LDPC Decoder with High Throughput 
and Fast Error Floor Detection, " 
Electronics Letters, 
vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 542-543, 2011. 
[15] G. Falcao, M. Gomes, 
V. Silva, L. Sousa, and 
J. Cacheira, 
"Configurable M-factor VLSI DVB-S2 
LDPC Decoder Architecture with Optimized Memory 
Tiling Design, " 
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Com­
mun. and Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, pp. 98, March 
2012. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:06:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
