IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

517

A Two-Stage Decoding Algorithm to Lower the Error-Floors for LDPC Codes
Xueting Zhang and Shaoping Chen

Abstract—A two-stage decoding algorithm to lower the error-floor for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is presented. An efficient stopping criterion is proposed to avoid unnecessary iterations in the first stage. If the stopping criterion is reached, the first stage decoding will be terminated and the second stage decoding will be started, where the unsuccessfully decoded words are re-decoded by manipulating the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of two types of specifically selected variable nodes. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm can effectively lower the error floor of LDPC codes while maintaining a low decoding complexity.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, two-stage decoding, error floor, post processing.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have received much research attention in the past 15 years for their capacity-approaching performance and low-complexity iterative decoding [1]–[3]. However, the error floor caused by the trapping sets in the high signal-to-noise (SNR) regime may preclude LDPC codes from applications that require very low error rates [4], [5].
Many researches have been devoted to finding the causes of the error floor and developing methods to mitigate it, e.g., construction of LDPC codes with few dominant trapping sets [6], [7], averaged decoding [8], and two-or multi-stage decoding [5], [9], [10]. Although these methods can lower the error floor, they have their limitations. The specific construction methods cannot be used for existing LDPC codes. By smoothing the change of LLRs in the iteration of decoding, the averaged decoding method can effectively prevent codewords from being decoded into incorrect messages, but it requires more iterations to converge and therefore a higher complexity. In the two-or multi-stage schemes, variable nodes with a high probability of being wrongly decoded are chosen for flipping or erasing to break trapping sets [9], [10]. Compared to averaged decoding, they have faster convergence speed at low and moderate SNR, but unstable error events may occur due to accidental flipping of correct bits.
In this letter, a new two-stage decoding algorithm is proposed. In the first stage, an efficient stopping criterion is introduced to avoid unnecessary iterations. In the next stage, two types of variable nodes are selected and the previous unsuccessfully decoded words are re-decoded by manipulating the LLRs
Manuscript received September 15, 2014; revised January 1, 2015 and January 20, 2015; accepted January 21, 2015. Date of publication February 9, 2015; date of current version April 8, 2015. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61179009 and 61575786. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was M. Baldi.
The authors are with Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Wireless Communications, South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: deppy124@126.com; spchen@scuec.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2401554

of the selected nodes. This approach allows us to achieve good decoding performance at an acceptable complexity.
II. THE PROPOSED SCHEME
The proposed decoding algorithm is described as follows.
1) Decode the received code with log-domain belief propagation (BP) iterative decoding.
2) If the stopping criterion is reached, go to step 3, else if all checks are satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is reached, then go to the end.
3) Select type I and type II variable nodes. 4) Manipulate the LLRs of type I and type II variable nodes
and perform re-decoding. 5) If decoding succeeds or the maximum number of iterations
is reached, then go to the end, otherwise repeat step 4.
A. Stopping Criterion
In [8] and [10], the first stage decoding stops when all checks are satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is reached. This may lead to unnecessary iterations. The authors of [9] proposed the following stopping criterion: if the number of unsatisfied checks reaches a predefined threshold, the first stage decoding terminates. However, the threshold needs to be chosen carefully and a tradeoff is required between the performance and complexity.
To find our stopping criterion, we track the number of unsatisfied checks in decoding. Fig. 1 depicts variations on the number of unsatisfied checks over BP decoding iterations for (402, 201) PEG code, (504, 252) QC code, and (672, 336) Margulis code, where 10 decoding realizations are chosen for each code. It is seen that in most cases, the number of unsatisfied checks goes down first, then oscillates for a while before it reaches a constant level. This means that decoding got trapped in the stable trapping sets, which is what we try to prevent from happening. In few cases, the number of unsatisfied checks keeps oscillating over decoding iterations. This is because the positions of erroneous variable nodes change over decoding iterations. But this uncorrectable error is not the main cause of error floors [11]. Based on Fig. 1, we propose a new stopping criterion: when the number of unsatisfied checks remains unchanged for τ iterations, the first stage decoding will be stopped. The choice of τ depends on the specific LDPC codes and can be determined by simulations. Based on our simulations, it is suitable to set τ to be three for these codes.
B. Target Nodes Selection and Manipulation
In this section, two types of variable nodes are selected for further processing in the second stage decoding. Denote the number of variable nodes as nv. The LLR received from the channel and that from the output of the first stage decoding

1558-2558 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/0in5d:1e8x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

518

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 1. Change of the number of unsatisfied checks over BP decoding iterations. (a) PEG-LDPC. (b) QC-LDPC. (c) Margulis LDPC.

at the i-th node are defined as yin(i) and yo(1u)t(i), respectively. Target nodes are selected based on the following criteria:

TABLE I ERROR PROBABILITY OF THE FIRST STAGE DECODING

Type I nodes:

sign (yin(i)) = sign yo(1u)t(i) and yo(1u)t(i) > |yin(i)| and r(i) = yo(1u)t(i) + |yin(i)| > α.

Type II nodes:

from the channel, but the errors were not corrected in the first

sign (yin(i)) = sign yo(1u)t(i)
and yo(1u)t(i) < |yin(i)| .
In some LDPC codes, most variable nodes are involved in trapping sets. If we choose all variable nodes in the trapping sets for flipping and re-decoding, the complexity will be unacceptable. Instead of choosing the nodes according to their relative locations to the trapping sets, we select variable nodes based on whether the signs of their LLR values change and how the absolute values of LLRs vary after the first stage decoding. Our proposed scheme does not require any detailed knowledge of the dominant trapping sets, so the effort to locate them is saved.
For the selection of type I nodes, whose LLR values will be scaled to speed up the convergence rate in the second stage decoding, we search for those nodes that may have received wrong bits from the channel, but with a high probability of being corrected in the first stage decoding. To this end, we focus on finding those variable nodes whose signs of LLRs change

stage decoding. Let ai denote the location of type I node i and bj the location
of type II node j in the codewords. Denote the number of type I nodes and type II nodes as n1 and n2, respectively, L the maximum number of type II nodes being flipped, nm(2a)x the maximum number of iterations for each flipping, β the scaling factor. The larger β, the faster speed of convergence, but a higher probability of falling into pseudocodewords caused by the LLR overestimation. Simulations show that β should be chosen between one and two and β = 1.25 is a good choice from our experiments. The second stage of proposed decoding algorithm is described in Algorithm 1.
Different from the two-stage decoding methods in [5], [9] and [10], our proposed scheme exploits a simple yet efficient stopping criterion and a new idea of choosing two types of variable nodes for post processing in the second stage.
Algorithm 1 The Second Stage Decoding

and absolute LLR values increase after the previous decoding iterations. Their received bits may be erroneous, but can be corrected by using extrinsic belief information from other nodes in decoding. The choice of α depends on the specific LDPC codes to be decoded and can be determined by simulations. The results of Table I show that for the three different codes, most error bits in type I nodes can be corrected in the first stage decoding using α = 3, 4.
For the selection of type II nodes, whose LLR values will be flipped to reduce the error floor, we search for those nodes with high possibility of unsuccessful decoding. Therefore, we focus on finding those variable nodes whose signs of LLRs remain the same and absolute LLR values decrease after the previous decoding iterations. These nodes may have received wrong bits

Input:
yˆin: received LLR vector from the channel yo(1u)t: output LLR vector of the first stage decoding Output: yo(2u)t: output LLR vector of the second stage decoding uout: output of the decoded codewords
Initialization: yˆ = [yˆ(1), yˆ(2), . . . , yˆ(nv)]T: intermediate vector yˆ ←− yo(1u)t (Pre-processing for type I nodes)
for each type I variable node ai do yˆ(ai) = β · yo(1u)t(ai), i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , n1
end for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:05:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND CHEN: A TWO-STAGE DECODING ALGORITHM TO LOWER THE ERROR-FLOORS FOR LDPC CODES

519

(Flipping type II nodes and re-decoding)
for type II variable node bj do d(bj) = |yo(1u)t(bj )−yin(bj )|/|yin(bj )|, j = 1, 2, . . . , n2
end for
for l = 1 to L do
Find the node j subject to d(bj) = max(d(b1), d(b2), · · ·) and do

yˆ(bj ) = −β · yo(1u)t(bj )

Re-decode with updated LLR yˆ and get decoded yˆde Make hard decision and calculate the number of
unsatisfied checks Nu if Nu = 0 then
yo(2u)t = yˆde Make hard decision using yo(2u)t, output the decoded word uout, then go to the end else
Delete d(bj) from d yˆ = yde end if
end for yo(2u)t = yˆde Make hard decision with yo(2u)t and output the decoded word uout The end

Fig. 2. The BER comparison for PEG-LDPC.

C. Complexity Analysis

Let Ps be the probability of early stopping in the first stage, Ks and Ku the average number of iterations with successful and unsuccessful decoding in the first stage respectively, and Pi the probability of successful decoding after flipping i nodes in the second stage. The average number of iterations in our
proposed algorithm is

Fig. 3. The BER comparison for QC-LDPC.

L
K ≈ (1 − Ps)Ks + PsKu + Ps Pi · (i − 1)nm(2a)x . (1)
i=1

In the right-hand side of (1), the first two terms represent the

average numbers of iterations with successful and unsuccessful decoding in the first stage, respectively, while the third term stands for that in the second stage decoding. Although twostage decoding algorithms are in general more complex than

conventional BP decoding, early stopping and an increase in

convergence speed by LLR scaling of type I nodes keep our

proposed two-stage scheme at an acceptable complexity. This

is verified in our simulations reported in the next section.
Conventional BP decoding involves 6nvt (where t is the column weight of the parity-check matrix) floating-point mul-
tiplications per iteration [3]. Assume Ns iterations are saved in our proposed scheme, the total reduction of multiplication
operations is Cs = 6nvtNs. The extra computations introduced by the selection and processing include: n2 divisions and n2 additions for d(bj) = |yo(1u)t(bj) − yin(bj)|/|yin(bi)| calculations, (2n2 − L + 1)L/2 comparisons for sorting, n1 multiplications for scaling of type I nodes, and L sign changes for flipping
of type II nodes. Considering that the complexity of addition,
comparison or sign change operations is much lower than that

Fig. 4. The BER comparison for Margulis LDPC.
of multiplication or division, we neglect the former for the sake of convenience and obtain the extra computation burdens as Ce ≈ n1 + n2. Since n1 and n2 are usually small in practice, Ce is usually much less than Cs. Therefore, the overall computational complexity of our proposed scheme can be maintained at an acceptable level.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:05:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

520

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

TABLE II THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS

III. SIMULATIONS
Three kinds of LDPC codes, i.e., (1008,504) PEG-LDPC, (864,648) QC-LDPC and (2640,1320) Margulis LDPC, are constructed for simulations. They are decoded using five different decoding algorithms, namely, the conventional BP algorithm, the backtracking decoding algorithm [9], the averaged decoding [8], the multi-stage decoding with post-processing [10], and our proposed algorithm. An additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel is assumed in our simulations and set L = 10, n(m2a)x = 10, β = 1.25, and α = 4.
Fig. 2 compares the BERs of five different decoding schemes for PEG LDPC codes. Since PEG LDPC codes have a large girth, it is comparatively easy to mitigate their error floors. The results indicate that at BER of 10−5, our proposed algorithm has a little bit better BER performance than averaged decoding [8] and can achieve about 0.2 dB gain over the backtracking decoding [9] and the post-processing decoding algorithms [10].
Fig. 3 plots results for QC-LDPC codes. At BER of 10−4, our proposed algorithm can achieve about 0.2 dB, 1 dB and 1.1 dB gain over post-processing decoding [10], averaged decoding [8] and backtracking decoding [9], respectively. This can be explained by the fact that QC-LDPC codes have short code length and there exist a large number of short cycles in their Tanner graph. In this case, the simple processing of LLR averaging in [8] may decrease the LLRs of the reliable nodes and thus cannot overcome the trapping sets problems in QC-LDPC codes. In addition, the existence of a large number of short cycles in QC-LDPC codes makes it hard to trigger the second stage decoding in the backtracking algorithm, and therefore its BER performance cannot be further reduced in the high SNR regime.
Simulation results for Margulis LDPC codes are shown in Fig. 4. Even though there are many short cycles in their Tanner graph, their long length of codeword and large code distance help those decoding algorithms lower the error floor. Our proposed scheme has the best performance and achieves about 0.1 dB, 0.2 dB and 0.4 dB gain over the averaged, the postprocessing and the backtracking decoding respectively at BER of 10−7.

Table II lists the simulation results about the average iterations in the decoding. It shows that compared to other algorithms dealing with the error floor, the proposed scheme has the least iterations.
IV. CONCLUSION
A two-stage decoding algorithm is presented in this letter. By adopting an early stopping strategy in the first stage and using re-decoding combined with post-processing of two types of specifically selected variable nodes in the second stage, our proposed algorithm can effectively lower the error floor for LDPC codes while maintaining low complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check code,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[2] A. Pramanik, G. Patil, and L. Borman, “Small length quasi-cyclic LDPC code for wireless applications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Microelectron., Commun. Renew. Energy, 2013, pp. 1–5.
[3] D. J. MacKay, “Good error correction codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Feb. 1999.
[4] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[5] J. Kang, L. Zhang, Z. Ding, and S. Lin, “A two-stage iterative decoding of LDPC codes for lowering error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., New Orleans, LA, USA, 2008, pp. 1–4.
[6] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[7] S. Khazraie, R. Asvadi, and A. H. Banihashemi, “A PEG construction of finite-length LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1288–1291, Aug. 2012.
[8] S. Landner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Netw., Commun. Mobile Comput., 2005, pp. 630–635.
[9] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. A. Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[10] S. Beomkyu and P. Hosung, “Multi-stage decoding scheme with postprocessing for LDPC codes to lower the error floor,” IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. E94-B, no. 8, pp. 2375–2377, Aug. 2011.
[11] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:05:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

