High-Parallel Performance-Aware LDPC Decoder IP Core Design for WiMAX

Xiongxin ZHAO, Zhixiang CHEN, Xiao PENG, Dajiang ZHOU and Satoshi GOTO
Graduate school of IPS, Waseda University City of Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan zxx@moegi.wasea.jp

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a synthesizable LDPC decoder IP core for the WiMAX system with high parallelism and enhanced error-correcting performance. The proposed fully-parallel layered decoder architecture can fully support multi-mode decoding specified in WiMAX with 12~24 clock cycles for processing one iteration. By applying the 3-state processing schedule, it achieves twice parallelism with minor circuit area increase compared to state-of-the-art work, thus results in 46.8% improvement in power efficiency.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], which are firstly invented by Gallager in 1960s, can achieve near capacity error-correcting performance with the iterative twophase message passing (TPMP) decoding algorithm. Due to the excellent error-correcting capability and the development of structured codes for parallel decoding, LDPC codes are recently adopted by most of wireless communication systems, such as WiMAX, Wi-Fi and DVB-S2 standards. In 2003, Mansour introduced the concept of turbo-decoding messagepassing (TDMP) algorithm [2], which is also called layered algorithm, enabled up to twice convergent speed due to more frequent a-posteriori (APP) message updating [3].
LDPC codes specified in WiMAX are constructed with quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC structured codes [4]. Based on 6 different base matrices, totally 6 kinds of code-rates and 19 kinds of code-lengths are specified to adapt to variable communication status. Multi-mode decoding capability and up to 1Gbps decoding throughput with high reliability are basic requirements for modern WiMAX LDPC decoders. Unfortunately, LDPC decoders based on TPMP algorithm are not able to support multi-rate decoding. The fully-parallel LDPC decoders [5-6] have potentials to achieve very high decoding throughput, but suffer from complicated interconnection. The bit-serial fully-parallel decoder [7] achieves more than 3Gbps throughput with relatively good energy efficiency and the interconnection can be largely simplified. One typical implementation for multi-mode QCLDPC decoders is based on the partial-parallel layered architecture [8]. In their work, only one sub-block can be processed per clock cycle. The parallelism is limited by the

number of check-nodes (CN) in each layer or the sub-block size, and at least 76~88 clock cycles per iteration are required according to PCMs specified in WiMAX standard. The stateof-the-art partial-parallel layered decoder [9] applies two sets of processing units to increase the parallelism and process two sub-blocks in each clock cycle. By utilizing many techniques to avoid data dependency problem, they finally reduce the number of clock cycles per iteration to 48~54 for WiMAX. Our previously proposed bit-serial layered decoder [10] takes the advantages of the flexibility of layered scheduling and high parallelism of fully-parallel architecture. It achieves 24~48 clock cycles per iteration with minor area increase. However, the message saturation problem is not solved efficiently, which requires extra bit-width for the interconnection thus to decrease hardware utilization. Also the large number of decoding states for bit-serial message updating generates a lot of multiplexers (MUX), which occupy large area in the processing unit (PU) of decoder.
In this paper, we propose new fully-parallel layered decoder architecture which can fully support multi-mode decoding specified in WiMAX. Similar to the decoding schedule in [10], messages in a whole layer can be updated simultaneously. The 6-bit quantized message updating process and interconnection are split into 3 stages by applying 2-bit serial processing lines, so that the complicated interconnection and arithmetic can be avoided. Only 3 clock cycles are required to decode a whole layer instead of 6 as those in [10]. As a result, 12~24 cycles are enough to process one iteration so that the parallelism is doubled. Furthermore, the earlydetect-logic based message saturation process solves the message saturation problem without extra bit-width increase for interconnection, which improves the utilization of hardware resources. An advanced dynamic quantization (ADQ) technique is also proposed to enhance the error-correcting performance in layered decoder architecture. Simulation results show that 6-bit ADQ achieves bit error rate (BER) performance close to 7-bit fixed quantization with improved error floor performance. It is noteworthy that the total gate is only increased by 1% compared to [10] even we introduce new technique to enhance the performance, and the power efficiency is improved by 46.8% from the power synthesis report.

978-1-4799-0066-4/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

1136

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the preliminaries of the decoder design, including the description of decoding algorithm and the message saturation problem in [10]. Section III introduces the proposed ADQ technique briefly. Section IV introduces the fullyparallel layered LDPC decoder architecture in detail. Synthesis and comparison results are discussed in section V. Finally section VI concludes this paper.

shows the diagrams of pre-VNU (a) and post-VNU (b) for one serial processing line in bit-serial architecture. The CNU process cannot get started until all the q bits of VN message are obtained, which forces temporary storage (q-bit DFF) for VN message.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. Layered Decoding Algorithm with Quantization
The Offset Min-sum (OMS) approximation for TPMP algorithm has been adopted in LDPC many decoders with trade-off between complexity and the coding gain [11]. On the other hand, the layered algorithm applies different message updating schedule than TPMP algorithm. For each CN (or group of CN), the APP messages are updated after the CN message updating (CNU) immediately in layered algorithm. The updated APP messages participate in the following CNU within the iteration. The data dependency problem becomes serious in layered algorithm which limits the flexibility of its hardware implementations.

The OMS layered algorithm is adopted in our design. As described in [10], the operations for each CN in OMS layered algorithm with saturation process for quantized messages are focused on the following three equations.

λmn = SAT( Ln − Λtm−n1)

(1)

∏ Λtmn

=

max(min N( m)\ n

λmn

−

β ,0) sgn(λmn)
N( m)\ n

(2)

Ln = SAT( λmn + Λtmn)

(3)

Ln represents the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of APP message for the nth bit of the codeword. λmn and Λmn are the LLR of variable node (VN) and CN messages, respectively. N(m)\n denotes the set of the neighboring VNs for CN m excluding VN n. β is the offset value while t is the iteration number. We name the process in (1) as pre-VNU, (2) as CNU and (3) as post-VNU, for convenience of explanation in the following sections. The saturation process is shown in (4).

⎧2q −f −1 − 2−f , x > 2q −f −1 − 2−f

y

= SAT(x ) =

⎪ ⎨−

2q −f

−1,

x

<

−2q −f −1

(4)

⎩⎪x , others

Both the APP and VN messages are quantized with (q, f), in which q and f represent the total quantization bit size and fraction bit size, respectively. Notice that although the saturation process can be simply applied in bit-parallel decoders, it is a critical problem in the bit-serial architectures due to the difference in message transfer schedules.

B. Message Saturation Problem in Bit-serial Architecture
In bit-serial architecture, the VN and APP messages are split into q bits and processed in q clock cycles for pre- and post-VNU. Generally consider that the messages are in 2’s complement form and the processing starts from least significant bit (LSB) to most significant bit (MSB). Figure. 1

Figure 1. Diagrams of VNU in bit-serial architecture.

The bit-serial arithmetic units in pre- and post-VNU output serial bits to DFF and through permutation network (PN) to the input port of next pre-VNU, respectively. Saturation process needs to be implemented to avoid the error arithmetic results of current CNU and next pre-VNU, respectively, if the process gets overflowed. Our previous solution in [10] is shown in figure. 1 with extra circuits marked in blue. An overflow signal ‘ovf2’ needs to be sent through PN together with the MSB of new APP message to inform pre-VNU that the previously transmitted message is wrong. For the preVNU, the saturation process can be done by checking the overflow signal ‘ovf1’ generated in the MSB arithmetic cycle. The saturation process of current post-VNU can be done by checking both ‘ovf1’ and ‘ovf2’ signals in MSB arithmetic cycle of next pre-VNU. When overflow happens, maximum or minimum value of VN message will overwrite the message in DFF. It is proven that the saturation processing logic can ensure error-free process as the bit-parallel solution [10]. The demerit is that extra 1-bit width of PN is required, in which the output data are valid for only one sixth of the processing time.

III. ADVANCED DYNAMIC QUANTIZATION TECHNIQUE
Due to more frequent APP message updating in layered algorithm, saturation process for quantized messages updating becomes serious and worsens the error-correcting performance much. In order to enhance the performance for a fixed given quantization bit size, dynamically widening the quantization range when a large proportion of VNs have high reliability is a preferable solution. Taking the hardware implementation into consideration, an efficient criterion to trigger the quantization change in layered algorithm is proposed.

It is known that in OMS algorithm the CNU function (2) plays a decisive role for convergence, in which the product of signs is the dominant factor. Let we define the product of all signs of VN messages in CN as

∏ PSmn = sgn(λmn)

(5)

N( m)

and simply assume that there is at most one sign which differs from the correct decision of VN in each CN since such situation majorly occurs after several iterations. The following

1137

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

results can be deduced. If PS is positive, the CN tends to increase the reliabilities of all related VNs (i.e. Ln). If PS is negative, the CN tends to flip the sign of VN message which has the different sign at the expense of decreasing the reliabilities of other VNs.

2304 entries are involved in each layer. The central controller is responsible to tell PUs which entries should be processed or just bypassed. When the decoding modules finish all the iterations, parity-check function is also processed with the decoding modules and controlled by the central controller.

The decoding progress can be determined by the distribution of PS. The trigger criterion of quantization change for layered decoding is defined as follows. For successive l layers, if the total number of CNs with negative PS is less than PS-TH, the quantization change will be triggered. l and PS-TH are simulation-based values. The quantization change is processed at most once by dividing all APP and CN messages by 2 from the next layer. The proposed ADQ technique takes full advantage of the layered algorithm. It can quickly determine the decoding progress and then executes the quantization change immediately with very limited overhead. Simulation results show that 6-bit ADQ can achieve BER performance close to 7-bit fixed quantization for WiMAX LDPC codes with improved error floor performance.
IV. FULLY-PARALLEL LAYERED LDPC DECODER
A. Proposed Decoder Architecture

For the APP message interconnection between successive layers, the PN array is implemented. It contains a number of 21 PN instances, in which each PN is constructed with multiple stages of MUXs as that in [10] of 2-bit width. Two 2bit width cross-bar switching arrays SA_0 and SA_1 are inserted between PN array and PU array to separate 24 blocks of entries into two groups for the two-layer concurrent processing [10], which can reduce clock cycles per iteration as well as CN message memory size.
Compressed message storage method for CN messages is adopted, in which for one CN only the minimum and second minimum magnitude (MIN), the position of minimum magnitude (POS) and all the 24 sign bits (SGN) are stored instead of memorizing all the CN messages. By separating the MIN and POS memory blocks for two-layer concurrent processing, the CN memory size can be further reduced by 9.4% compared to that in [10].

B. 3-State Processing Unit (PU)

...

...

2C‐SM

...

...

...

... ... ...
... ... ...

...

...

Figure 3. Structure of 3-state processing unit.

Figure 2. Block diagram of the proposed fully-parallel layered LDPC decoder architecture.
Figure. 2 shows the block diagram of the proposed fullyparallel layered LDPC decoder core. It is made up of a central controller module, processing unit (PU) array, register based CN message memory and a permutation network (PN) array with two switching arrays (SA). A 4608-bit width 2-1 MUX is responsible for the transfer of intrinsic messages into the decoding modules. Input and output buffers are not integrated in the decoder core.
The central controller module plays an important role in the decoder core, which not only deals with the input of intrinsic messages with the bit-width up to 4608 and the output of 2304 hard-decision bits, but also controls the states of decoding including the hard-decision and generates trigger signal for ADQ technique. In the proposed fully-parallel layered decoder, a number of 2304 6-bit quantized APP messages are transferred and processed through the decoding modules, which are split into 3 stages. For each stage totally 2304x2 bits are processed within one clock cycle. Not all the

Figure. 3 shows the structure of the 3-state PU. 24-bit enable signals pre-EN/pst-EN for instructing the pre-/postVNU manners. An enable signal set to 1 lets the corresponding VN participate in the updating of current layer, otherwise PU stores and bypasses the APP message of the corresponding VN to the next layer. The CNU process is shown in the blue dotted box, in which the 2’s complement to signed-magnitude (2C-SM) conversion and comparison trees for finding minimum (Min_finder) are in bit-parallel styles. The two minimum magnitudes are found in two clock cycles to reduce critical path. In order to achieve fully overlapped decoding, two Min_finder units (Min_finder0/1) are needed.

pre‐VNU S0:

DDDDDD 6 543210

POS MIN1 bypass

MF1 MIN2

Post‐ VNU

pre‐VNU S1:

pre‐VNU

S2:

SAT

DDDDDD 5 4 32 1 0
bypass DDDDDD 6 5 4 32 1 0

POS MIN1 MIN2

POS

MF0

MIN1 MIN2

Post‐ VNU
Post‐ VNU

Figure 4. Processing tasks in different states.

1138

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Three PU operating states: S0, S1 and S2, which are controlled by the central controller, process different tasks, as shown in figure. 4. Two bypass routes are constructed and marked with red lines, thus the pre-VNU of current layer and post-VNU of previous layer can be fully overlapped.

respectively. Furthermore, an advanced dynamic quantization (ADQ) technique is proposed to enhance the error-correcting performance. By using efficient criterion, 6-bit dynamic quantization can perform close to 7-bit fixed quantization with improved error floor performance.

Parity-check function can be processed by clearing CN messages and freezing PU state on S2. As a result, it can be processed with only 4~8 clock cycles, and the decoding time overhead is 1/30, which is 1/3 of that in [9].
C. Early-detect-logic Based Saturation Process
Although the saturation process in [10] is functionally correct, the extra bit-width requirement for interconnection worsens the decoding efficiency and is not practical for the new decoder. By utilizing the properties of 3-state PU and the quantized range of CN messages, early-detect-logic based saturation process is proposed. Saturation can be detected by this logic at state S1, instead of S2 normally. When saturation is detected, the output bits in S1 and S2 will be forced to be the saturated data while the error between transferred and saturated data at S0 is ignored. Simulation results tell that by reducing the CN message range by 1 ulp, the early-detectlogic based saturation process can achieve negligible performance loss. The logic is not described here in detail.
V. IMPLEMENTATION AND COMPARISON RESULTS
The proposed decoder is synthesized in SMIC 65nm low leakage LVT CMOS technology with Synopsys Design Compiler. The maximum clock frequency is reported as 122MHz which achieves the smallest area constraint resulting 978k equivalent gates. By using 55MHz clock frequency and 10 iterations for calculation, the decoder achieves data throughput of 1021Mbps. DC power analysis report shows that with 1.2V supply voltage and 55MHz clock frequency the power consumption is 59.5mW. The power efficiency is calculated to be 5.8pJ/bit/iteration.
Table 1 summarizes the implementation results of this design and comparisons with the state-of-the-art partialparallel layered decoder [9] and bit-serial layered decoder [10]. The new architecture achieves up to 4.3 times parallelism compared to [9] and twice parallelism compared to [10] with minor gate count increase, which is mainly due to the reduction of MUX for logics driven by processing states in PUs. Synthesized power consumption is reasonable since the new decoder has similar composition with [10]. It achieves 46.8% and 72.1% improvement in normalized power efficiency compared to [10] and [9], respectively.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a synthesizable, fully-parallel layered LDPC decoder IP core for WiMAX is presented. By applying the 3state processing architecture, it takes 12~24 clock cycles per iteration and doubles the parallelism of our previous bit-serial decoder work [10] with almost the same gate count. Power synthesis result shows that our proposed decoder core achieves power efficiency as 5.8pJ/bit/iteration, which is 46.8% and 72.1% improvement compared to our previous work [10] and the state-of-the-art WiMAX decoder [9],

TABLE I.

COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS WIMAX DECODERS

Technology Supply voltage Decode mode Iteration number Cycle# per iteration
Logic gate count

In this work
SMIC 65nm 1.2V
Full-mode 10
12~24
645k

[9]
SMIC 13µm 1.2V
Full-mode 10
48~54
470k

[10]
SMIC 65nm 1.2V
Full-mode 10
24~48
597k

Memory (register)

47.2kb

72.5kb

56.4kb

Equiv. gate count

978k

946k

968k

Frequency

55MHz

214MHz

110MHz

Data throughput

1021Mbps

946Mbps

1056Mbps

Power consumption **59.5mW

397mW

115mW

*Norm. power
Norm. power efficiency

59.5mW

199mW

115mW

5.8pJ/bit/iter 20.8pJ/bit/iter 10.9pJ/bit/iter

*All the powers have been normalized to 65nm technology. **Power consumption in this work is DC synthesis result.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 8, issue 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI System, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976-996, 2003.
[3] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn and J. Goldberger, “An Efficient Message-Passing Scheduling for LDPC Decoding,” Proc. 23rd IEEE Convention in TelAviv, pp. 223-226, 2004.
[4] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja and D. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp.2966-2984, 2004.
[5] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404-412, March 2002.
[6] L. Zhou, C. Wakayama, N. Jankrajarng, B. Hu and C.-J. R. Shi, “A high-throughput low-power fully parallel 1024-bit 1/2-rate low density parity check code decoder in 3D integrated circuits,” Proc. ASP-DAC, pp. 92-93, Jan. 2006.
[7] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone and F. R. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps bitserial block-interlaced min-sum LDPC decoder in 0.13-μm CMOS,” Proc. IEEE CICC, pp. 459–462, 2007.
[8] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti and J. R. Cavallaro, “VLSI Decoder Architecture for High Throughput, Variable Block-size and Multi-rate LDPC Codes,” Proc. IEEE ISCAS, pp. 2104-2107, 2007.
[9] B. Xiang, D. Bao, S. Huang and X. Zeng, “An 847–955 Mb/s 342–397 mW Dual-Path Fully-Overlapped QC-LDPC Decoder for WiMAX System in 0.13μm CMOS,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1416-1432, June 2011.
[10] X. Zhao, Z. Chen, X. Peng, D. Zhou and S. Goto, “An 115mW 1Gbps Bit-Serial Layered LDPC Decoder for WiMAX,” IEICE TRANS. on Fundamentals: Special Section on VLSI Design and CAD Algorithms, Vol.E95-A, No.12, pp. 2384-2391, Dec. 2012.
[11] J. Chen, “Reduced complexity decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check codes and turbo codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electrical Eng., Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, 2003.

1139

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

